                             CAMPANALOGIA:
                                _OR THE_
                                  ART
                                   OF
                                RINGING
                               Improved.
With plain and easie Rules to guide the Practitioner in the Ringing all
                          kinds of _Changes_.
                                   TO
                    Which is added, great variety of
                              _NEW PEALS_.


                               _LONDON_,

   Printed by _W. Godbid_, for _W.S._ and are to be sold by _Langley
             Curtis_ in Goat-Court on _Ludgate_-hill. 1677.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                                   TO
                             _THE HONOURED_
                                 AND TO
                      _His much Esteemed_ FRIENDS,
                     The Members of the Society of
                            COLLEDG YOUTHS.


_Gentlemen_,

As your Society even _ab origine_ hath deservedly acquired an eminency
in many respects above others of this kind; so more especially for the
pregnancy of its Members in the composing of _Peals_. For when the Art
of _Cross-pricking_ lay enveloped in such obscurity, that it was thought
impossible that double Changes on five bells could be made to extend
farther than _ten_, and triple and double Changes on six farther than
_sixty_; then it was that a worthy and knowing Member of your Society,
to dissipate those mists of Ignorance, and to usher in the bright morn
of Knowledg, prickt those much applauded Peals of _Grandsire_ and
_Grandsire Bob_; which for their excellency have for many years together
continued triumphant in practice amidst all others whatsoever; and which
indeed have been a great light in the production of that great variety
of new Peals herein contained; the greatest part of which being also the
offspring of your Society, I therefore thought fit to usher them into
the world under the wings of your Protection.

_Gentlemen_, as a member I held my self obliged to add my Mite to your
full fraught Treasury of Speculative and Practical Knowledg of this
kind; though I confess your acquisition on this account will be very
mean, since my want of ability sufficient to undertake a thing of this
nature, and also want of opportunity by converse with others to supply
my own defects, have rendred the Book less acceptable than it might have
been done by some more knowing head and acuter Pen. And although I am
conscious that it meriteth not your acceptance; yet I assume the
confidence to believe that you will favour it with a kind entertainment
amongst you; and the rather, for that I know you are too judicious to
sentence it without first casting into the ballance of your indifferent
judgments some Grains of Allowance: The countenance you shew it will
silence Detractors, and be Armour of proof against the fools bolts which
may happen to be soon shot at the Author, who is

                                       _Gentlemen_,

                                              _A constant well-wisher to
                                               the Prosperity (though an
                                                        unworthy member)
                                                       of your Society_,

                                                                    F.S.




                               _ERRATA._


_Courteous Reader_,

_Some few faults have escaped the Press: as page 27 line the 4th, for_
grateful _read_ graceful. _page 31. line the 19th. for_ imitatieg _read_
imitating, _with some others, which you are desired either candidly to
amend, or tasitly to pass over._

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                                 OF THE
                                  ART
                                   OF
                                Changes.


These clear dayes of Knowledge, that have ransackt the dark corners of
most Arts and Sciences, and freed their hidden mysteries from the bonds
of obscurity, have also registred this of _Ringing_, in the Catalogue of
their Improvements; as well the Speculative as the Practick part, which
of late years remain’d in _Embryo_, are now become perfect, and worthy
the knowledge of the most ingenious. Although the Practick part of
_Ringing_ is chiefly the subject of this Discourse, yet first I will
speak something of the Art of _Changes_, its Invention being
Mathematical, and produceth incredible effects, as hereafter will
appear. But first, I will premise a word or two, to shew what the nature
of those _Changes_ are. Some certain number of things are presupposed to
be changed or varied; as 2.3.4.5.6. or any greater number whatsoever;
then the number of things to be so varied must have the like number of
fixed places assigned them. As if five men were sitting upon five stools
in a row; the stools are supposed to be fixed places for the five men,
but the men by consent may move or change to each others places at
pleasure, yet still sitting in a row as at first: now this Art directs
how, and in what order those five men may change places with each other,
whereby they may sit sixscore times in a row, and not twice alike. And
likewise a _Peal_ of five Bells, being raised up to a fit compass for
ringing of _Changes_, are there supposed to have five fixed places,
which time assigns to their notes or strokes; yet the notes of the Bells
may change into each others places at pleasure: now this Art also
directs the manner and method of changing the five notes in such sort,
that they may strike sixscore times round, and not twice alike.

The numbers of _Changes_ are thus to be discovered. _Two_ must first be
admitted to be varied two wayes; then to find out the Changes in
_three_, the Changes on two must be multiplied by three, and the product
will be six, which are the compleat number of Changes on three.

Those six Changes being multiplied by four, will produce 24, which are
the compleat number of Changes on four. The 24 Changes on four, being
multiplied by five, will produce 120, which are the compleat number of
Changes on five. And in like manner the 120, being multiplied by six,
will produce 720, which are the compleat number on six. The 720, being
multiplied, by seven, will produce 5040, which are the number of Changes
on seven. The 5040, being multiplied by eight, will produce 40320, which
are the number of Changes on eight. Those Changes on eight, being
multiplied by nine, will produce 362880, which are the number of Changes
on nine. Those Changes on nine, being multiplied by ten, will produce
3628800, which are the number on ten. Those on ten, being multiplied by
eleven, will produce 39916800, which are the number on eleven. Those
also being multiplied by twelve, will produce 479001600, which are the
compleat number of Changes on twelve. And if twelve men should attempt
to ring all those Changes on twelve Bells, they could not effect it in
less than seventy five years, twelve Lunar Months, one week, and three
days, notwithstanding they ring without intermission, and after the
proportion of 720 Changes every hour. Or if one man should attempt to
prick them down upon Paper, he could not effect it in less than the
aforesaid space. And 1440 being prickt in a sheet, they would take up
six hundred sixty five Reams of Paper, and upwards, reckoning five
hundred Sheets to a Ream; which Paper at five shillings the Ream, would
cost one hundred sixty six Pounds five Shillings,

The reason of the aforesaid Multiplication, by which the numbers of
Changes are discovered, and also that those Products are the true
numbers of Changes, will plainly and manifestly appear in these
following Demonstrations.

But first, _two_ must be admitted to be varied two ways, thus.——

                                 │12
                                 │21

And then consequently, _three_ will make three times as many Changes as
_two_; for there are three times two figures to be produced out of
three, and not twice two the same figures, which are to be produced by
casting away each of the three figures one after another. First, cast
away 3, and 1.2 will, remain; cast away 2, and 1.3 will remain; cast
away 1, and 2.3 will remain. So that here are three times two figures
produced out of the three, and not twice two the same figures, as 12.
13. 23. each two may be varied two ways, as before: then to the changes
which each two makes add the third figure which is wanting; as to the
two changes made by 1.2 add the 3, to the changes on 1.3 add the 2, and
to the changes on 2.3 add the 1, and the three figures will stand six
times together, and not twice alike, as here appeareth.

                                  │123
                                  │213
                                  │———
                                  │132
                                  │312
                                  │———
                                  │231
                                  │321
                                  │———

_Four_ will make four times as many changes as _three_. For there are
four times three figures to be had out of four, and not twice three the
same figures, which are to be produced by casting away each of the four
figures by turns. First cast away 4, and 123 will remain; cast away 3,
and 124 will remain; cast away 2, and 134 will remain; and lastly,
casting away 1, and 234 will remain; so that here is 123, 124, 134, 234,
and not twice three the same figures. Now each three may be varied six
ways, according to the preceding Example. Then to the six changes which
each three makes, add the fourth figure which is wanting; as to the six
changes on 123 add the 4, to the six changes on 124 add the 3, to the
six changes on 134 add the 2, and to the six changes on 234 add the 1,
which renders the changes compleat; for then the four figures stand
twenty four times together, and not twice alike, as here appears.

                                  │1234
                                  │2134
                                  │————
                                  │1324
                                  │3124
                                  │————
                                  │2314
                                  │3214
                                  │————
                                  │1243
                                  │2143
                                  │————
                                  │1423
                                  │4123
                                  │————
                                  │2413
                                  │4213
                                  │————
                                  │1342
                                  │3142
                                  │————
                                  │1432
                                  │4132
                                  │————
                                  │3412
                                  │4312
                                  │————
                                  │2341
                                  │3241
                                  │————
                                  │2431
                                  │4231
                                  │————
                                  │3421
                                  │4321

_Five_ will make five times as many changes as _four_; for there are
five times four figures to be had out of five, and not twice four the
same figures, which are to be produced as before, by casting away each
of the five figures by turns. Cast away 5, and 1234 will remain; cast
away way 4, and 1235 will remain; cast away 3, and 1245 will remain;
cast away 2, and 1345 will remain; cast away 1, and 2345 will remain. So
that here are five times four figures produced, and not twice four the
same figures. Now each four may be varied twenty four ways, as in the
preceding example; then to the twenty four changes which each four
makes, add the fifth figure which is wanting: as to the twenty four
changes on 1234, add the 5; to the twenty four changes on 1235, add the
4. to the changes on 1245, add 3. to the changes on 1345, add 2. and to
the changes on 2345, add 1. which renders the changes compleat, for then
the five figures stand sixscore times together, and not twice alike.

                     12345│12354│12453│13452│23451
                     21345│21354│21453│31452│32451
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     13245│13254│14253│14352│24351
                     31245│31254│41253│41352│42351
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     23145│23154│24153│34152│34251
                     32145│32154│42153│43152│43251
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     12435│12534│12543│13542│23541
                     21435│21534│21543│31542│32541
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     14235│15234│15243│15342│25341
                     41235│51234│51243│51342│52341
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     24135│25134│25143│35142│35241
                     42135│52134│52143│53142│53241
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     13425│13524│14523│14532│24531
                     31425│31524│41523│41532│42531
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     14325│15324│15423│15432│25431
                     41325│51324│51423│51432│52431
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     34125│35124│45123│45132│45231
                     43125│53124│54123│54132│54231
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     23415│23514│24513│34512│34521
                     32415│32514│42513│43512│43521
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     24315│25314│25413│35412│35421
                     42315│52314│52413│53412│53421
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————
                     34215│35214│45213│45312│45321
                     43215│53214│54213│54312│54321
                     —————│—————│—————│—————│—————

And in this manner the compleat numbers of changes on six, seven, eight,
nine, ten, eleven, twelve, _&c._ may also be demonstrated.

The numbers of changes will also plainly appear by the methods, whereby
they are commonly prickt and rung. Now the nature of these methods is
such, that the changes on one number comprehends the changes on all
lesser numbers, and that so regularly, that the compleat number of
changes on each lesser number are made in a most exact method within the
greater; insomuch that a compleat Peal of changes on one number seemeth
to be formed by uniting of the compleat Peals on all lesser numbers into
one entire body; which will manifestly appear in the 479001600 changes
on twelve: for that Peal comprehends the 39916800 changes on eleven;
these likewise comprehend the 3628800 changes on ten, these changes on
ten comprehend the 362880 on nine, these on nine comprehend the 40320 on
eight, these on eight comprehend the 5040 on seven, these likewise the
720 on six, the 720 also comprehend the 120 on five, the 120 comprehend
the 24 changes on four, these also comprehend the six changes on three,
and the six comprehend the two changes on two. Each of these Peals
(_viz._) on eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, and
two, being made in a most exact method within the changes on twelve. For
Example, _two_ are first admitted to be varied two ways, thus——

                                   │12
                                   │21

Now the figure 3 being hunted through each of those two changes, will
produce the six changes on three. The term _Hunt_, is given to a Bell to
express its motion in Ringing, which in figures is after this manner. It
must lie behind, betwixt, and before the two figures: first behind them
thus, 1 2 3; then betwixt them, thus, 1 3 2; now before them, thus, 3 1
2: this is called a _hunting_ motion, and here it has hunted through the
first change of the two, wherein it made three variations, as appears in
the figures, standing thus in order.——

                                  │123
                                  │132
                                  │312

Now it must hunt through the other change, which is 2 1, in the same
manner as before; that is, first it must lie before, then betwixt the
two figures, then behind them, thus, 321, 231, 213. Here it has hunted
through again, wherein it made three more variations; which three being
set directly under the former, the six variations will then plainly
appear, as in these figures: where the three figures stand six times
together, and not twice alike.

                                  │123
                                  │132
                                  │312
                                  │321
                                  │231
                                  │213

Now the figure 4 being in like manner hunted through each of those six
changes, will produce the 24 changes on four. First, therefore it must
hunt through the first, which is 123, letter (_a_), then through the
second change of the six, which is 132, letter (_b_); then through the
third, which is 312, letter (_c_), and so it being hunted through the
rest of the changes likewise, will produce the twenty four changes on
four.

                               (_a_)│1234
                                 „  │1243
                                 „  │1423
                                 „  │4123
                                    │
                               (_b_)│4132
                                 „  │1432
                                 „  │1342
                                 „  │1324
                                    │
                               (_c_)│3124
                                 „  │3142
                                 „  │3412
                                 „  │4312

The figure 5 being hunted through each of those twenty four changes,
will produce the 120 changes on five, First therefore it must hunt
through the first, which is 1234, letter (_a_); then through the second,
which is 1243, letter (_b_); then also through the third, which is 1423,
letter (_c_). In which manner it being hunted through the rest of the
twenty four changes, will produce the 120 on five. And then the figure 6
being hunted through each of those sixscore changes will produce the 720
changes on six. And the figure 7 being hunted through each of those 720
changes, will produce the 5040. In which manner also the eighth, ninth,
tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, being successively hunted through each
Peal in the aforesaid order, will at length produce the compleat number
of changes on twelve. Wherein ’tis observable, that all the figures,
except two, have a hunting motion; which two may properly be term’d the
Center, about which the rest do circulate. By these methods it is
evident, that every hunting figure hath a certain number of figures
assigned, through which tis constantly to hunt: as in the aforesaid
Example on twelve, where the 1.2 are assigned for the figure 3 to hunt
through, as appears in the six changes before. And in like manner, 123
are assigned for the figure 4 to hunt through; 1234 are assigned for the
figure 5 to hunt through; 12345 for 6 to hunt through, _&c._ Now the
figure 3 hunts as many times through the 1.2. as those two make changes,
that is, two times wherein it makes twice three changes, that is, six,
as before appeareth. The figure 4 hunts as many times through the 123,
as those three figures make changes, that is, six times; wherein it
makes six times four changes, which amounts to twenty four. The figure 5
hunteth as many times through the 1234, as those four figures make
changes, that is, twenty four times; wherein it makes twenty four times
five changes, which amounts to 120. The figure 6 hunts as many times
through the 12345, as those five make changes, that is 120 times,
wherein it maketh 120 times six changes, which amounts to 720. And in
like manner the figure 7 hunts 720 times through 123456, wherein it
maketh 720 times seven changes, which amounts to 5040. The eighth
hunteth 5040 times through 1234567, wherein it makes 40320 changes. The
9^{th} hunteth 40320 times through 12345678, wherein it makes 362880
changes. The tenth hunteth 362880 times through 123456789, wherein it
makes 3628800. The eleventh hunteth 3628800 times through
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. wherein it makes 39916800. And lastly, the twelfth
hunteth 39916800 times through 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11. wherein it makes
39916800 times twelve changes, which amounts to 479001600, being the
compleat number on twelve. By which ’tis evident, that every hunting
figure hunts as many times through its assigned number of figures, as
those figures are capable of making changes, which in short comprehends
the summe and substance of this method, which is universal from two, to
all greater numbers whatsoever.

                              (_a_)│12345
                                „  │12354
                                „  │12534
                                „  │15234
                                „  │51234
                                   │
                              (_b_)│51243
                                „  │15243
                                „  │12543
                                „  │12453
                                „  │12435
                                   │
                              (_c_)│14235
                                „  │14253
                                „  │14523
                                „  │15423
                                „  │51423

If we consider the multitude of different words, wherewith we express
our selves in Speech, it may be thought almost impossible that such
numbers should arise out of twenty four Letters; yet this Art of
variation will produce much more incredible effects. To give an instance
thereof, I will shew the numbers of every quantity of Letters from two
to twelve, that may be produced out of the Alphabet. The generality of
Words consisting of these quantities, (_viz._) two letters, three
letters, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, and twelve
letters. There are 10626 times four letters to be produced out of the
twenty four letters of the Alphabet, and not twice four all the same
Letters. There are likewise 42504 times five letters, 134596 times six
letters, 346104 times seven, 735471 times eight, 1307504 times nine,
1961256 times ten, 2496144 times eleven, and 2704156 times twelve. Now
each quantity being varied by the rules of this Art, will produce
incredible numbers. First the 10626 times four letters, being multiplied
by 24, which are the number of ways to vary each four letters, will
produce 255024 that is to say, four letters may be produced out of the
Alphabet to stand together after this manner (_a b c d_) two hundred
fifty five thousand and twenty four times, and not twice alike. And in
like manner, the 42504 times five Letters, being multiplied by 120,
which are the number of ways to vary each five, will produce 5100480.
The 134596 times six letters, being also multiplied by 720, will produce
96909120. The 346104, being multiplied by 5040, will produce 1744364160.
The 735471, being multiplied by 40320, will produce 29654190720. The
1307504, being multiplied by 362880, will produce 474467051520. The
1961256, being multiplied by 3628800, will produce 7117005772800. The
2496144, being multiplied by 39916800, will produce 99638080819200. And
lastly, the 2704156 time twelve letters, being multiplied by 479001600,
will produce 1295295050649600, which products being all added together,
as also 12696 which are the numbers consisting of two and three letters,
the whole will amount to 1402556105125320, wherein there are not two
alike, nor two letters of one sort in any one of them; which being
written or printed on large Paper in _folio_, allowing 5000 to a sheet,
they would take up 561022442 Reams of Paper and upwards, reckoning 500
sheets to a Ream: which Paper all the Houses in the City and Liberties
of _London_ would not contain; and in quantity doubtless infinitely
exceeds all the Books that ever were printed in the world, reckoning
only one of each Impression. And at the rate of five shillings the Ream,
the Paper would cost 140255610.5 Pounds sterling; which is above four
times as much as the yearly Rent of all the Lands and Houses in
_England_ amounts to. And all the people both young and old in the City
and Suburbs of _London_ (admitting they are five hundred thousand) could
not speak the like numbers of words under forty years and upwards, each
of them speaking 15000 every hour, and twelve hours every day. These
prodigious numbers are the more to be admired, considering that the
greatest number of letters in any of them, exceeds not twelve, neither
are two letters of one sort in any one of them: but by producing and
varying all the greater quantities, and placing two or more letters of
one sort, or two of one sort and two of another, with all variety of the
like nature that commonly happens in words, the numbers arising thereby
would infinitely exceed the former; And if all the numbers of every
quantity of letters from one to twenty four, together with all the
variety as aforesaid, were methodically drawn out and varied according
to the rules of this Art; which might easily be performed in respect of
the plain and practical method of doing it; but the infinite numbers of
them would not permit a Million of men to effect it in some thousands of
years: it would be evident, that there is no word or syllable in any
language or speech in the world, which can be exprest with the character
of our _Alphabet_, but might be found _literatim_ and entire therein;
and more by many thousands of Millions than can be pronounced, or that
ever were yet made use of in any language.

I will here give one instance of another kind, shewing the admirable
effects of this Art, and so conclude. A man having twenty Horses,
contracts with a Brick-maker to give him one hundred pound Sterling;
conditionally that the Brick-maker will deliver him as many Loads of
Bricks, as there are several Teams of six Horses to be produced out of
the aforesaid twenty to fetch them, and not one Team or Sett of six
Horses to fetch two Loads. The Brick-maker might be thought to have made
a very advantageous bargain, but the contrary will appear. For there are
thirty eight thousand seven hundred and sixty several Teams of six
Horses, to be produced out of twenty, and not twice six the same Horses;
then the Brick-maker must deliver as many Loads as there are Teams, and
each Load consisting of five hundred Bricks, the whole would amount to
19380000, which being bought for one hundred pounds as aforesaid, would
not cost above five Farthings a thousand; and at the rate of thirteen
shillings and four pence the thousand, they amount to twelve thousand
nine hundred and twenty pounds Sterling. But should a contract be made
with the Brick-maker to deliver as many Loads of Bricks, as there are
Teams of six Horses in each, to be produced out of the aforesaid twenty,
which shall stand in the Cart in a differing manner; that is to say,
although there may be the same Horses in several Teams, yet their places
shall be so changed, that they shall not stand twice alike in any two
Teams. On this account the Brick-maker must deliver seven hundred and
twenty times as many as before; for there are 38760 several Teams as
before I have shewed: then each Team may be placed 720 ways in the Cart,
and not twice alike, which is to be done according to the methods
whereby the 720 changes on six Bells are rung. So that 38760, which are
the number of Teams, multiplied by 720, which are the number of ways to
vary the six Horses in each Team, the product will be 27907200, which
are the compleat number of Teams; and every Team carrying one Load,
consisting of five hundred Bricks, the Whole will amount to 13953600000
Bricks. And after the proportion of a hundred and fifty thousand of
Bricks to a House, they would build ninety three thousand and twenty
four Houses; which are above six times as many as the late dreadful fire
in _London_ consumed. And at the rate of thirteen shillings and four
pence the thousand, they are worth 6976800 pounds Sterling, which is at
least four hundred Waggon-loads of money, as much as five Horses can
ordinarily draw.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                                   AN
                              INTRODUCTION
                           To the Practice of
                                RINGING


As the original design of casting Peals of Bells was in order to make
pleasant Musick thereon; so the Notes in every Peal are formed apt for
that end and purpose, every Peal of Bells being tun’d according to the
principles of Musick; for in a Peal of six Bells are the six plain
Song-Notes, whereupon all Musick consists, namely, _la sol fa mi re ut_.
But in regard that in ringing of them the Notes cannot be had at
command, as the Notes of other Instruments may; therefore, as the
Practitioners in ancient time found some necessity to cause all the
Notes to strike successively after one another, so likewise they thought
fit in ringing them to place the Notes in this following order. The
least note to lead or strike first, then the Note which is the next
degree deeper or flatter, and so the rest of the notes to strike after
each other according to their degrees, the flattest striking last; in
which order the notes were successively reiterated both at fore-stroke
and back-stroke, from the beginning to the end of each Peal. And at this
day the same order is also observed in raising, ceasing, and ringing
them at a low compass; wherein each note being confin’d to strike in a
certain place, therefore had they their terms of First, Second, Third,
Fourth, Fifth, _&c._ given them, to denote their order and places of
striking; from whence also the Bells derive those terms of distinction
by which they are now known. Although the ringing of a Peal of Bells in
the aforesaid order, (which is commonly term’d _Round-ringing_) is in it
self Musical; yet the Notes may be so placed in ringing, that their
Musick may be rendred much more pleasant: for in Musick there are
Concords, which indeed may be term’d the very life and soul of it, that
renders all Musick exceeding pleasant: the principal are Thirds, Fifths,
and Eights; Thirds are 1 3. 2 4. and such like: Fifths are 1 5. 2 6.
_&c._ Eights are 1 8. 2 9. 3 10. _&c._ each Concord consisting of two
notes. They may well be termed Concords, in respect of their agreement
and harmony; for the two notes (as if it were by mutual consent) being
struck together at one instant, or else immediately after one another,
affords delightful melody to the ear; in which respect, a peal of five
Bells are capable of making better Musick than a peal of four; six
better than five; and more especially will ten or twelve make more
excellent Musick than any lesser numbers can possibly do, there being
greater variety of Concords therein, and especially of Eights. For this
Musical end were changes on Bells first practised, _changes_ being
nothing else but a moving and placing of the Notes in ringing, whereby
variety of pleasant Musick is made; and as the manner of moving the
notes, is, for two notes to change places with each other, therefore are
they called _Changes_. The methods of changes being somewhat intricate,
I have therefore penn’d the following Treatise as a Clue to guide the
Practitioner through the Labirinth of them, wherein I have made use of
figures to represent the notes of Bells, the manner thus. In a peal of
five Bells there are five several notes, which with figures are thus
exprest, 1 2 3 4 5: the figure 1 represents the least or sharpest note,
which is term’d the First, because its place in round ringing is to
lead; this note is most commonly called the _Treble_. The figure 2
represents the note which is the next degree deeper or flatter, and is
term’d the Second, because it strikes in the second place. And in like
manner 3 represents the note of the third Bell, 4 the note of the fourth
Bell, and 5 the note of the Fifth or Tennor. In which manner, the
figures in all the following methods do likewise represent the notes of
Bells.

Since the ringing of changes requires the peal of Bells, on which the
changes are to be rung, to be first raised up to a set Pull, which
compass is most proper for the ringing of them; therefore the Learners
first practice must be to raise a Bell true in peal, to ring it at a low
compass, and also to cease it true in peal, wherein consists the chief
grounds of this Art, which depends on the Ear, and therefore much
judgment is required therein. And to speak the truth, most practitioners
are in these days somewhat deficient herein; the ringing of changes
having generally diverted the Learners fancy from the practice of
_raising_, _round-ringing_, and _ceasing_, by which means we have in a
manner lost one Excellency in the pursuit of another. Therefore I could
wish that the Practitioners of this Art would set a greater esteem on
true Ringing in general, since the only excellency as well in the
ringing of Changes as Rounds, depends thereon: the keeping of time being
as essential to render all kinds of ringing pleasant to the ear, as ’tis
to render any other kind of Musick; therefore the practitioner ought to
have a Musical eare, and to have some judgment in beating time, without
which he can never ring his Bell true in its place. A prospect of true
ringing at any certain compass under the Sett, may thus be taken; for
Instance, in ringing a peal of 5 Bells; from the fore-stroke of every
note to the next fore-stroke of the same note, there ought to be eleven
_punctums_ or Beats of time, which are all supposed to stand at
Æquidistances: now in ten of these _punctums_, the five notes ought
exactly to strike at the fore-stroke and back-stroke, and the eleventh
stands as a Cypher to guide the Treble-note at fore-stroke to a double
proportion of time from the Tennor-note at back-stroke: which blank
_punctum_ must also be beaten in the same place by every note, to render
its fore-stroke answerable to that of the Treble. For example; the third
note having struck at fore-stroke, it must beat eleven _punctums_ of
equidistance unto its striking there again. The first _punctum_ is that
of the 4^{th} note, the second 5, the third 1, the fourth 2, the fifth
3, the sixth 4, the seventh 5, the eighth 0, the ninth 1, the tenth 2,
the eleventh its own place of striking again at fore-stroke. These
_punctums_ or Beats of time, must be proportioned either wider or
closer, according to the compass of the Treble: therefore first the
Treble must fix its compass certain and true at fore-stroke, which ought
to be proportionate to what the number of the notes, and compass of the
peal of Bells, may according to judgment permit; and then from one
fore-stroke of it to the next, if there are five notes; there ought to
be eleven _punctums_ of equidistance assigned, wherein the notes should
exactly strike (except the blank) as before. From hence ’tis, that the
most judicious Ringer ought to be put to the Treble; for that bell
cannot possibly be rung true by any other means than by beating of its
own time; and although the exactness of true ringing requires the like
in every note, when once the compass is fixed, yet the leading note
being rung true, may be a guide to the rest of the notes, which may
tolerably take their measures of time from the Treble-note: but for
every note to take its measure of time solely from the next preceding
note, must needs be very erronious; for thereby they implicitely lead
one another out of the way. Or else in the ringing of five bells, from
the fore-stroke of every note to the next fore-stroke of the same note,
there may be one and twenty _punctums_ or beats of time assigned, to
stand at equidistances; and the five notes, as they follow one another,
at the fore-stroke and back-stroke to strike in every second _punctum_,
except the Treble-note at fore-stroke, which must strike in the third
_punctum_ from the Tenor at back-stroke; so that then there will be two
of those spaces betwixt every note, and three betwixt the note of the
Tenor at back-stroke and the note of the Treble at fore-stroke, which
possibly by some may be held a better compass than the former: but _quot
homines tot sententiæ_. Every Practitioner, that has judgment to beat
his own time, has the advantage of ringing his bell true, whilst the
rest of the notes commit faults; for the compass being once fixed, as
many bells as do either rise or fall from thence commit errors.

The truest way of raising a peal of bells according to the best of
modern practice, is, as quick as may be; every Ringer taking assistance
to raise his bell, according as the going of it requires. In raising of
them, the lesser bells as the Treble _&c._ ought at the first pull to be
swayed very deep, and held down in the sway by strength of armes as much
as may be, to delay the time of their first striking, by which means the
bigger bells, which carry a large compass, may have space to come in;
and the raising of the smaller bells to be continued with a strong pull,
giving them scope over head (for the aforesaid reason) untill they come
up Frame-high, or thereabouts, and then the pull to be slacken’d, and
the bells leisurely to be raised to the intended height or pitch. The
bigger bells of the peal, as the Tenor _&c._ must in their first raising
be checkt or pinch’d over head, by which means the notes of all the
bells may be made to strike round in their due place and order from the
beginning; and observe, that at the first pull all the bells must follow
one another as close as may be. A peal of bells may thus be ceased: the
falling of the bells from a Sett-pull must gradually be done, by
checking them only at Sally, until the low compass renders the Sally
useless; and when they are ceased so low, that they scarce strike at
back-stroke for want of compass: then he that rings the Treble, may give
notice (by stamping on the ground) that the next time the bells come to
strike at the fore-stroke, they may be checkt down so low as to cease
their striking at the back-stroke, yet their striking round at the
fore-stroke may be continued, until they are brought into a chime, which
is a graceful conclusion of a peal.

In raising of a peal of bells, all the notes ought to strike round at
one pull: but mistake me not, I do not mean at the first pull; for at
small bells ’tis usual to sway them all round at the first pull without
striking; at the second pull to strike them at the fore-stroke, and at
the third pull at back-stroke. In raising of a peal of more weighty
bells, ’tis usual to strike them double at the fourth pull, because the
extraordinary weight and large compass of the hind-bells permits it not
to be done sooner. In the first raising of a peal of bells, one bell
ought not to strike before the rest, or to miss striking when the rest
go round: neither ought any bell in ceasing to strike after the rest, or
to leave striking before the rest; all which, according to the
strictness of true ringing, are accounted great faults.

The peal of bells on which the changes are to be rung, must first be
raised up to a Sett-pull, which compass is most proper for the ringing
of changes; for then the notes of the bells may be had at command.
Therefore before the young Practitioner can be capable of ringing
changes, he must be extraordinary well skill’d in the managing of a bell
at a Sett-pull, which is absolutely requisite, for this reason: In the
ringing of changes, his mind will be so busied and wholly taken up with
the consideration of the course and method of them, and his eye
continually wandring about to direct his pull in the following of the
other bells; that unless he has extraordinary skill in the managing of
his own bell, and can set it in a manner hood-winkt, he will be apt
either to drop or overturn it; or else on the other hand, for want of
skill, his eye and mind will be so fixed on his own rope and bell to
guide the managing of it, that he cannot at the same time mind the
course of the changes, and then no wonder if he is in a wood, which
consequently follows; and indeed hence partly ’tis, that the Learners in
their first practice do oftentimes toil and moil themselves to so little
purpose. Therefore ’tis not enough that the young Practitioner can set a
bell it may be half a score times together, when ’tis an even wager that
he either drops or overturns it in those ten-pulls: but he must be so
perfectly skill’d, as that he might adventure to lay ten to one, that he
can set it thirty or forty times together, both fore-stroke and
back-stroke, without dropping or overturning it, and without looking
directly either on his hands or rope whilst he sets it. Therefore in his
practice of setting a bell, he may cast his eye about on the other
bell-ropes whilst he manageth his bell, whereby he may accustom himself
to manage it as the ringing of changes requires.

The ringing of changes is performed, partly by the ear, and partly by
the eye; the ear informs when to make a change, the eye directs the pull
in the making of it, but then again the ear guides the striking of the
note true in its place according to time. So that the ear and eye have
each of them its proper object in the ringing of changes, and therefore
ought at the same time to be absolutely free from all others whatsoever,
the notes of the bells being the object of the ear, and the bell-ropes
the object of the eye. Now these two Senses in the time of ringing do
each of them thus perform its office. First, the ear, as a Sentinel,
discovers the near approaching change, and also the place wherein his
note lies, that is, whether before or behind the note wherewith ’tis to
make a change, and gives present information to the eye, to perform its
part accordingly in the making of it; but then again the eye refers it
to the ear, to place the note true in striking. But questionless (by the
bie) the truest ringing of changes is to be performed only by the ear;
but then the Practitioners must be capable to judg of time, and to beat
it true, which must be the only direction to guide their pull; and then
it must be performed at a peal of bells that may be managed with ease:
and being so fitted in all respects, the changes may doubtless be rung
more true, with greater pleasure to the Practitioners, and much more
free from mistakes and forgets, only by the ear, than by making use of
the eye to direct their pull. But in regard that either the ill going of
the bells, or want of fit accomplishments in the practitioners, may
render it unfit for common practice; therefore the surest way is to ring
both by the eye and ear, as I said before. Now to render the eye and ear
rightly useful in the ringing of changes, five things ought by the young
Practitioner to be well understood. First, he must be able to
distinguish the notes of a peal of bells, and to know one from another
in the time of ringing. Secondly, he must apprehend the places of the
notes. Thirdly, the precedency of notes. Fourthly, the manner of making
a change in ringing. Fifthly, a general prospect of the manner of
putting the four preceding notions into practice.

_Observation 1._ The Learner must be able to distinguish the notes of a
peal of bells one from another, and to know them asunder; as the
Treble-note from the Second, the Second from the Third, _&c._ which, tis
true, may readily be done in round ringing, because each note may be
known by the place wherein it constantly strikes; but in ringing of
changes it is more difficult. For admitting that six bells should strike
in this order, 5.3.6.1.4.2. it might puzzle an unskilful ear to judg
which is the Treble, or which the Second note, especially whilst any
other note strikes betwixt them: and the like difficulty might happen in
distinguishing the rest of the notes, as the _2d_ from the _3d_, _&c._
To remove this difficulty, he must endeavour to acquire some skill in
tuning the notes of a peal of bells, with his voice, which he may do by
imitating the notes of the bells when he hears them ring: or else any
person that has skill in singing, will presently direct him therein, and
also how to take the true pitch of any notes with his voice, which will
be the only means to distinguish them asunder.

                                ┌──┬──┐
                                │ 1│2 │
                                ├─┬┴┬─┤
                                │3│4│5│
                                └─┴─┴─┘

_Observ. 2d._ The Learner must rightly apprehend the places of the
notes, which I think cannot better be done than by this means.
Considering that the notes of a peal of bells do all strike one after
another at the fore-stroke, and the like at back-stroke; it might be
requisite for him to imagine, that the notes in their striking do lie in
a direct line, that is, in a row at the fore-stroke, and the like again
at back-stroke; for then the places of the notes will much resemble the
places of the figures wherewith the changes are prickt: for as the
figures of every change do all stand in a row; so likewise the notes of
the bells, being imagined to strike in the like row, he may the more
readily apprehend the places of the notes, and consequently of changing
them. For the practick part of this Art, is performed by means of
imaginary, not real notions; which will thus manifestly appear. This is
the platform of a Frame, wherein five bells may be supposed to hang in a
Steeple, the figures therein representing the places wherein the five
bells hang. Now in the sixscore changes on five bells, we will suppose
the Treble to be the whole Hunt, and to hunt up first over the Second,
then over the Third, _&c._ Now the Treble cannot really move out of the
place wherein it hangs; but by delaying its striking untill the Second
Bell has struck, it may by that means strike next after it; and again,
by delaying its striking until the Third has struck; it may also strike
next after that, this being the true manner of the changes; by which
’tis evident, that the bells have neither really such places nor motion
as is pretended, but is meerly imaginary, and was at first feigned only
as a Guide to direct the Practitioner’s apprehension in the ringing of
them. So that although the art of changes is in it self a real thing,
yet the notions by which they are reduced to practice on bells, are not
so. For which reason, the several practitioners of this Art, before they
can become expert, are fain to form in their minds imaginary notions to
guide them; some after one manner, some perhaps after another, according
to their several fancies, yet all tending, to render the methods of
changes practicable on bells; and having once form’d in their minds such
imaginary helps, they become expert in short time: and then no sooner do
they understand the methods of changes prickt with figures, which they
commonly discover at first view; but they are presently capable of
ringing them readily on bells, which experience daily testifies. And
hence it is, that oftentimes the Learners, although they perfectly
understand the methods of changes prickt, and also can perfectly manage
a Bell; yet for want of a right apprehension of the nature of changing
the notes, which of themselves it may be they cannot soon attain, are
therefore much puzzled in their first practice of ringing changes.
Therefore as a guide, the Learner must first form in his mind a fit
representation of the places of the notes; which I think cannot better
be done, than by imagining each note to be a figure; as the Treble-note
to be the figure 1, the second note the figure 2, the third note the
figure 3, and the like of the rest. Then whensoever he hears a peal of
bells ring, let him by strength of imagination conceit, that each note
bears the shape of a figure; that is, at the same instant of time that
the note strikes, he may imagine that it leaves the impression of the
figure behind it, and that with the eye of his imagination he perfectly
sees it: and likewise as the notes of the bells do all strike after one
another at the fore-stroke, so he may imagine that they lie in a row in
the shape of figures; and the like again at back-stroke. For instance:
suppose that five Muskets were charged with five bullets, and that each
bullet bears the shape of a figure; one Gun to be charged with the
figure 1, another with the figure 2, and the other three Guns with these
three figures, 3. 4. 5. Then supposing a straight line were drawn upon
the wall, thus —————————— and that the five Muskets were by five men
levell’d against the line, which is to be the mark for them to shoot at;
the figure 1 to be first shot off, then the figure 2, and so the rest in
order immediately after one another: now at the same instant of time
that the Guns are heard to go off, the five figures would appear in a
row upon the wall, thus. [Illustration: –1–2–3–4–5–] So in like manner
when he hears a peal of five bells strike after one another at the
fore-stroke, and again at back-stroke, he may imagine that at the very
instant of their striking their notes appear to his apprehension in the
shape of the five figures, and that they strike in a row, thus, 1 2 3 4
5, as if each Bell were a Gun, and had shot out its note in the shape of
a figure. There being necessity that the young Practitioner must either
imagine each note to be a real figure, or else a representative: for as
the ear is to be his guide to direct when to make each change; so a
right apprehension of the motion and places of the notes, must be a
means to guide his ear. Now in regard that the changes are first prickt
with figures, from whence the notes of the bells derive their course,
therefore if in ringing he imagine each note to be a real figure, then
the same knowledge that guides the pricking, guides also as readily the
ringing of them, for then the note of his bell is supposed to have the
same course with that of a real figure. But if he imagines that each
note is not a real, but a representative of a figure; then consequently
it must only have the like, and not the same course: by which means,
whilst he is ringing of changes, his mind must have frequent recourse to
his Pocket, that is, to the changes there prickt; from whence he must
continually fetch instructions to direct the course of his Bell, which
is oftentimes the case of the Learner: his thoughts in the time of
ringing being commonly upon the figures that are prickt, either upon
paper, or else upon the Steeple-wall, whilst it should be wholly intent
upon the notes. Therefore in a word, the Practitioner whilst he is
ringing of changes, must fix his mind fully and wholly upon the notes of
the bells, and not permit it in the least to wander from thence; for the
notes are to be the sole object of the thoughts in the time of ringing.

The notes being imagined to strike in a row as aforesaid, their places
will then soon be understood. The notes do take their places according
to their successive order of striking both at fore-stroke and
back-stroke; each succeeding note taking its place next to that which
preceds it: for whatsoever bell leads either at fore-stroke or at
back-stroke, its note lieth in the first place of the supposed row of
notes; and that which strikes next after the leading note, its note
lieth in the second place of the supposed row of notes, and so the rest
in the like order. As if five bells should strike thus after one another
either of fore-stroke or back-stroke, 5 4 1 2 3. here the _5th_ lieth in
the first place, because it was first struck; the _4th_ in the second
place, because it was second struck; the Treble in the third place,
because it was third struck; the _2d_ in the fourth place, because it
was fourth struck; and the _3d_ in the last place, because it was last
struck; and the like of the notes in every change.

_Observ. 3._ The next thing to be understood by the Learner, is the
precedency of the notes. Now whereas in the ringing of changes, the
notes do all strike after one another at the fore-stroke, and again at
the back-stroke, therefore are they said to lie before or behind each
other, according to their places of striking. As if five men were
standing in a row, as these five figures represent, 1 2 3 4 5, the first
man to stand at the fig. 1, the second man at the figure 2, _&c._ and
that they stand with their faces all one way, that is, the first man
ready to lead, and the rest to follow him one behind another. Now the
first man stands before the rest, and the fifth man behind the rest; the
second man stands behind the first man, but before the third; the third
man stands behind the second, but before the fourth; and the fourth
stands behind the third, but before the fifth. In which manner the notes
being supposed to strike in the like row, may also be laid to lie before
or behind each other as the men did. For whatsoever note leads either at
fore-stroke or back-stroke, is said to lie before the rest; and that
which strikes last, to strike behind the rest. The note which lieth in
the second place, as on the one hand it lieth behind the leading note,
so on the other hand it lieth before the note in the third place. As the
note in the third place lieth behind the note in the second place, so it
lieth before the note in the fourth place. And in like manner, every
note is said to lie behind those that strike before it, and before those
that strike after it.

_Observ. 4._ A Change is to be made betwixt two notes, by moving them
into each others places; wherein ’tis to be observed as a general Rule,
That every change must be made betwixt two notes that strike next to
each other. As if five bells were ringing round in this order, 12345,
the 1 and 2 may make a change, or 2 and 3, or likewise 3 and 4, or 4 and
5, because each two lie next each other; but the 1 and 3 cannot, because
2 strikes between them, much less may 1 and 4, _&c._ The two notes which
make every change, moves into each others places in the making of it;
wherein one note is said to move _up_, and the other _down_. The reason
why one of them is said to move up, is, because he that rings that bell,
in the making of the change must hold it up at the Sett a little longer
than ordinary, to delay its striking, whereby ’tis made to follow the
other note which before it preceded; and because ’tis so held up,
therefore ’tis said to make an _Up-change_, or to move up: and on the
contrary, the reason why the other note is said to move down, is,
because he that rings it, pulls down the bell a little sooner than
ordinary, to make it strike before the note which before it followed;
and because ’tis so pulled down, therefore it is said to make a
_Down-change_, or to move down. I will here give a short though certain
rule to know when an Up-change or a Down-change is to be made:
whensoever any note moves to strike behind the note wherewith it makes a
change, it makes an up-change in doing it; and whensoever it moves to
strike before the note, which ’tis to make a change with, it makes a
down-change in doing it: so that every note which moves fromward the
leading-note, makes an up-change; and when it moves toward the
leading-note, it makes a down-change. I will here shew the manner of
making a change: admitting that a peal of five bells were raised to a
sett-pull, which is the usual compass for ringing of changes; the notes
are first supposed to strike in this order, 12345. Now a change may be
made betwixt any two notes that strike next each other; I will here make
it betwixt the 3d. and 4th. which is to be done by moving them into each
others’ places. Now ’tis observable, that before the making of the
change, the 3d. note lies before the 4th. that is, it strikes next
before the 4th; and the 4th. lies behind the 3d. that is, it strikes
behind it: now in the making of the change, the 3d. must move to strike
behind the 4th: wherein it makes an up-change; and the 4th. note at the
same time must move to strike before the 3d. wherein it makes a
down-change; the change being made, the bells will strike thus, 12435.
All changes whatsoever are made in the aforesaid manner: for as the _3d_
note made an up-change in moving to strike behind the _4th_, and the
_4th_ at the same time a down-change in moving to strike before the
_3d_; so in like manner the two notes that make every change, must in
the making of it move the one up, and the other down, as the _3d_ and
_4th_ here has done. The Learner may take notice, that in ringing termes
’tis not usual to say, that a bell makes an up-change, or a down-change;
but in short, that it _moves up_ or _down_, which implies the former.
When a note makes an up-change, ’tis then said to move _over_ the other
note; and when it makes a down-change, to move _under_ it: as in the
next preceding example, where the _3d_ note is said to move up over the
_4th_, and the _4th_ down under the _3d_, in which manner the terms
_over_ and _under_ are given to the two notes that make every change.

_Observ. 5._ In the time of ringing changes, two things are by the
Practitioners to be well considered. First, to observe and readily to
know, which two bells are always to make the next succeeding change:
Secondly, if he is concern’d therein, to consider what bell he is to
follow in the making of it. Upon a right knowledge of these two things,
depends the Practick part of this Art. To make him expert herein, he
must before hand perfectly understand, and readily remember the course
and method of the changes prickt with figures, wherein he ought to be so
well skill’d, as to be able to prick them down divers ways, that is, to
make any figure a Hunt at pleasure; which when he can readily and
speedily do, without pausing to consider of the course, then ’tis
presumed that he understands the methods throughly. But yet he will not
be capable to put them in practice, untill he understands the manner of
making a change in ringing; neither can he understand that, until he
understands the precedency of the notes; nor the precedency, until he
understands the places; nor the places, until he knows the notes one
from another. Therefore the four preceding observations being first
perfectly understood, and also the methods of the changes as before; the
Practitioner may then successfully proceed in the ringing of changes;
and as a further help therein I will here instruct him. There are three
bells concern’d in the making of every single change, except only when
’tis made behind, and then but two: whensoever the note of his bell is
to make a change with any other note, his ear must then inform him
whether it lies before or behind the other note; if it lies before, then
in making the change it must move up behind it, that is, to follow it;
and consequently, he must draw down his bell next after that which he
makes a change with, which is called an up-change, as I said before. But
if the note of his bell lies behind the other, then in making of the
change it must move down to strike before it, and consequently he must
draw down his bell next after that which the other before followed, this
being a down-change. So that the making of an up-change is very easie,
because he must always follow that bell which he makes a change with;
but a down-change is more difficult, because he cannot so readily
apprehend what bell he is to follow; yet there is a certain rule for it,
which is this: to observe beforehand what note strikes the next but one
before his, which bell he must follow in the making of the change.
Whensoever the two notes, which strike next before his note, are to make
a change; he must consider, that notwithstanding his note is to lie
still in its place, yet he is concern’d therein, because the bell which
he followed before the making of the change, must in the making of it
move away down, and therefore he must follow the bell that comes into
its place.

The changes are to be rung, either by _walking_ them, as the term is; or
else Whole-pulls, or Half-pulls. By _walking_ them, is meant, that the
bells go round four, six, eight times or more in one change; which way
is very proper for young Practitioners, to introduce them into a more
ready way of Practice; for whilst the bells go round divers times in one
change, they have in the mean time leisure to consider which two bells
are to make the next following change, and also what bell each of them
is to follow in the making of it; and so by diligence in practice they
will by degrees acquire a more ready skill to enable them to ring at
whole-pulls. Whole-pulls, is, when the bells go round at the fore-stroke
and back-stroke in a change; and every time they are pull’d down at
Sally, a new change is made. Whole-pulls was the general practice in
former times; and indeed, considering the manner of the hanging of the
bells in those days, they could not well be rung at half-pulls: but
since the improvement of the Art of Bell-hanging, that is, with round
Wheels, trussing them up in the Stock, and placing the Roll at right
Angles with the Sole of the Wheel; the bells go much better, and are
managed with more ease at a Sett-pull than formerly: therefore the
changes are now generally rung at half-pulls, that is, at the
fore-stroke one change, at the back-stroke another, and so throughout.

In ringing half-pulls, some peals of changes will cut compass, wherein
the whole Hunt comes always to lead at the back-stroke; to prevent
which, make the first change of the peal at the back-stroke. In plain
and single changes on six bells, to hunt (that is, whole Hunt) the
Treble, third, or fifth, down at the beginning of a peal cuts compass,
unless prevented as before. Also to hunt the second, fourth, or sixth up
at the beginning of a peal, cuts compass, unless prevented as before.
Which rules, leaving out the Tenor, serves in like manner to prevent
cutting compass on five bells.

’Tis convenient in ringing, to give notice of the extream changes, and
he that rings the slowest Hunt, may best do it. The manner of it is, to
say _Extream_, when the leading bell is pulling down, in order to make
the change next before the extream; by which means there will be one
compleat change betwixt the warning and the extream: longer warning
would be too much, and shorter too little.

The divers kinds of changes on Bells may be comprehended under two
heads, _viz._ Plain Changes, and Cross Peals, which terms are
comparatively given: for as the first are plain and easie only in
comparison to the methods of the second; so consequently the second
cross and intricate in comparison to the methods of the first. I will
first shew in what respect they differ, and then proceed to the methods.
Plain changes (I mean compleat peals) are such as have one universal
method, wherein all the notes except three have a direct hunting course,
moving gradually under each other in one plain and uniform order. But
the methods of cross peals are various, each peal having a course
differing from all others: and although most of them have Hunts, yet the
Hunts have different kinds of motions, and some very intricate. Moreover
plain changes are also term’d Single changes, because in the ringing of
them there is only a single change made in the striking of all the notes
once round either at fore-stroke or back-stroke; whereas in cross
changes ’tis usual to make as many changes as the number of notes will
permit. For example, supposing that a peal of 5 bells were raised, and
rung at a Sett-pull; the notes are supposed to strike round in this
order, 12345: now any two of the notes that strike next together may
make a change, therefore either a single or a double change may be made
at pleasure. The single change is made by changing only two notes; the
double change is made by changing four notes, that is, two to make one
change and two another, yet ’tis called one double change, and not two
changes, in regard ’tis made in the striking of the five notes of the
bells once round: as, admit the treble, second, third, and fourth,
should make a change, ’tis thus to be done, 21435, where the Treble and
Second made one change, and 3, 4 another; which we will imagine to be
made at the fore-stroke of the bells, and therefore ’tis called one
double change, and not two changes, because ’tis entirely made in the
striking of the five notes once round. So that this one double change
has effected that which would have required two single changes to have
done the like. For instance, there can but two notes change their places
at once in a single change, therefore the Treble and Second shall first
change their places thus, 21345; then the third and fourth thus, 21435:
so that here the five notes have gone twice round to effect that, which
in the double change was done in going once round. And this is the
nature of the difference between Plain and Cross changes.

As the Learner ought to proceed regularly in his practice, beginning
first with the plainest and easiest methods. I will therefore observe
that order, and first shew the course and methods of Plain changes.


                      _The Changes on two Bells._

Two bells are capable to make only two changes, which is to be done by
changing the notes twice, as in these figures.——

                                 │_1 2_
                                 │ 2 1
                                 │ 1 2


                     _The Changes on three Bells._

There are six changes on three bells; which are made by this rule: the
two first and two last notes must be changed by turns.

                                                        │_123_
          First the two first notes, which are 1 2 thus.│ 213
          The two last, which are 1 3, thus.            │ 231
          The two first                                 │ 321
          The two last                                  │ 312
          The two first                                 │ 132
          The two last                                  │ 123

In these six changes ’tis observable, that the two first notes, which
were 1 2, made the first change of the six; but they may as well be rung
by

                                                             │_123_
     beginning with the two last notes, which are 2, 3 thus——│ 132
     Next the two first notes, which are 1 3, thus,          │ 312
     The two last                                            │ 321
     The two first                                           │ 231
     The two last                                            │ 213
     The two first                                           │ 123

The six changes can be rung no more than these two ways here set down.

The Six changes are sometimes rung by observing a hunt therein, which is
very improper, since every note has a like course. Yet I confess in
demonstrating the methods on twelve, I did there admit a Hunt into the
six changes; but that was only for demonstration sake.

The compleat peals of plain changes, from three to all greater numbers
whatsoever, as the Twenty four changes on four, the Sixscore on five,
the Seven hundred and twenty on six, _&c._ are prickt and rung by one
method; all the notes having a hunting-motion, except only three in each
peal, which three do make the six changes in the same manner as they are
before prickt. So that the Six changes on three may be term’d the
_basis_ or foundation of the compleat peals on all greater numbers.

Every Hunting note in each peal has a certain number of notes assigned,
through which ’tis always to hunt. The term _hunt_ is given to a note in
respect of the manner of its motion, which I will shew in this example.
First, the notes of four bells are supposed to strike round in this
order, 1234. The Treble shall be the Hunt, and the other three assigned
or appointed for it to hunt through. Now whereas the Treble-note leads,
it must move through its assigned number to strike behind them: and
whereas every change must be made betwixt two notes that strike next
each other, as I have shewed before in the _4th Observation_; therefore
the hunting-note is confin’d to move gradually through the rest by
making a change with each note that strikes next to it; and accordingly
it must first move into the _2d_ place, next into the _3d_ place, and
lastly into the _4th_. So that ’tis to make a change with every note
that lies behind it; first with the _2d_ note, next with the _3d_, and
lastly with the _4th_.

                                            │_1234_
                    The first change is thus│ 2134
                    The second thus         │ 2314
                    The third thus          │ 2341

The hunting note has here moved through its assigned number; for whereas
at first it did lead, now it strikes behind them. Wherein ’tis
observable, that it made up changes all the way; which of necessity it
must do, because every note with which it was to make a change, lay
behind it: and because it made up changes, therefore ’tis said to have
hunted up. The hunting-note shall now move through its assigned number
again, to lead as at first. Therefore first it must move into the _3d_
place, then into the second place, and lastly into the first place,
which is called the Treble’s place; in which motion it must make a
change with each note that strikes next before it: first with the _4th_
note, next with the _3d_, then with the _2d_.

                       The first change thus│2314
                       The second thus      │2134
                       The third thus       │1234

’Tis observable, that here the Treble made down-changes all the way,
which of necessity it must do, because every note with which it was to
make a change, lay before it: and because it made down-changes,
therefore it is said to have hunted down. This is the manner of the
motion of the hunting notes in all peals of plain changes; for they hunt
up and down through their assigned number, as the 1 here has done. This
example is plain and full to instruct the Learner in the hunting of any
bell, therefore he ought to peruse it diligently, that he may understand
the true scope and meaning of it; and as a help he may apply himself to
practice by taking a Treble, and attempt to hunt it up and down as this
Example directs; which he may the more readily do, if he understand the
_5th Observation_ before set down, which guides him to make a change in
ringing. So that partly by reading and well considering of what I have
here wrote, and partly by practice, he may in a short time become
perfect in the hunting motion of any note; which when he rightly
apprehends, he will then presently be capable of understanding the
following methods; and therefore I shall be the more brief in my
directions to them.


                      _The Changes on four Bells._

Twenty four changes may be rung upon four bells: but the Learner may
first practice the twelve changes, and the eighteen changes. In the
twelve changes the notes are all to be hunted up after one another,
which may be called the Twelve all over. First the treble-note must be
hunted up, letter (_a_); then the second note must likewise hunt up,
letter (_b_); next the third note must hunt up, letter (_c_); and lastly
the _4th_ note also, letter (_d_).

                                  │_1234_
                               ───┼──────
                               _a_│ 2134
                                „ │ 2314
                                „ │ 2341
                               ───┼──────
                               _b_│ 3241
                                „ │ 3421
                                „ │ 3412
                               ───┼──────
                               _c_│ 4312
                                „ │ 4132
                                „ │ 4123
                               ───┼──────
                               _d_│ 1423
                                „ │ 1243
                                „ │ 1234

The four notes may also hunt down one after another. First, the _4th_
note must hunt down to lead: then the _3d_ note likewise, and so the
_2d_ and Treble one after another, which may be term’d the Twelve all
under.

  Courteous Reader, in my directions to the course of each peal, I do
    there refer by letters to the examples; which I am forced to do, to
    prevent those confused breaks, and unhandsome spaces, which
    otherwise would have happen’d both in examples and precepts.
    Whatever letter I mention in my directions, refers to the like at
    the figures. For instance; in my directions to the twelve changes
    next before, I there directed the treble-note to be first hunted up,
    letter (_a_); which letter refers to the like letter at the first
    three changes of the twelve, where the Treble hunted up, as ’tis
    here again represented, and the like of the rest.

                                _a_│2134
                                 „ │2314
                                 „ │2341

In the Eighteen changes, the Treble is a hunting note, but never hunts
up farther than the _3d_ place; and when it lies there, the two first
notes must make a change; and every time it leads, the two hindmost
notes. First it hunts up into the _3d_ place, letter (_a_); the two
first notes, Which are 2.3, make a change, letter (_b_); the Treble
hunts down (_c_). The two hindmost notes make a change (_d_), the Treble
hunts up (_e_). The two first notes, which are 3.4, make a change (_f_)
the Treble hunts down (_g_); the two last notes, which are 3.2, make a
change (_h_), which method being continued, will bring the bells round
at the end of eighteen changes. The Eighteen changes may also be rung by
hunting the _4th_ note down into the _2d_ place, and then a change to be
made behind: the _4th_ note to be hunted up again into its own place,
and then a change to be made before, which course being continued, will
produce Eighteen changes.

                                   │1234
                                ───┼────
                                _a_│2134
                                 „ │2314
                                ───┼────
                                _b_│3214
                                ───┼────
                                _c_│3124
                                 „ │1324
                                ───┼────
                                _d_│1342
                                ───┼────
                                _e_│3142
                                 „ │3412
                                ───┼────
                                _f_│4312
                                ───┼────
                                _g_│4132
                                 „ │1432
                                ───┼────
                                _h_│1423
                                ───┼────
                                _i_│4123
                                 „ │4213
                                ───┼────
                                _k_│2413
                                ───┼────
                                _l_│2143
                                 „ │1243
                                ───┼────
                                _m_│1234

The Six changes on three are the ground of the Twenty four changes on
four; for one of the four notes hath a constant hunting motion through
the other three, in the same manner as in the preceding Example, _page
50._ and the three notes are to make the six changes in the same manner
as I have before shewed in the changes on three bells; one of the six
changes being always made every time the hunt lies either before or
behind the three bells: therefore if the Learner do but rightly
apprehend the course of the six changes, and also the manner of the
motion of the hunting note, he will presently understand the method of
the twenty four changes. The six changes in the twenty four, according
to the terms of ringing are called Extream changes, and the three bells
which makes them, Extream bells. So that in the twenty four changes,
there is a hunt and three extream bells. Every time the hunt lies either
before or behind the extream bells, an extream change must then be made.
The extream changes may be made two ways, _viz._ either betwixt the two
farthest extream bells from the hunt, or else betwixt the two nearest
extream bells to it. In this Example every extream change shall be made
betwixt the two farthest extream bells from the hunt, and the treble
shall be the hunting note, which must first hunt up (_a_); then the two
farthest notes from the hunt, which are 2.3, must make an extream change
(_b_). The Treble must hunt down (_c_). The two farthest notes from the
hunt, which are 2.4, must make an extream change (_d_). The treble must
hunt up (_e_); the two farthest notes from the hunt, which are 3.4, must
make an extream change (_f_). The treble-note must hunt down (_g_). The
two farthest extream bells from the hunt, which are 3.2, must make an
extream change (_h_). The treble must hunt up (_i_). The two farthest
notes from the hunt, which are 4.2, must make an extream change (_k_).
The treble must hunt down (_l_). The two farthest extream bells, which
are 4.3, must make an extream change (_m_), which concludes the peal.
Now the Learner for his satisfaction may take out the extream changes in
the same order as they were made, as first at (_b_), then (_d_), and so
(_f.h.k.m._) and they will stand as they are here set down; where ’tis
evident, that 2.3.4 have made the six changes according to the method of
the first six changes on three bells, before set down, (_page 48._)
where the first change of that six was 213, and this being 324, is the
same in course though the figures differ, and the rest of the changes in
this six, are likewise the same in course and method with those.

                                   │1234
                                ───┼────
                                _a_│2134
                                 „ │2314
                                 „ │2341
                                ───┼────
                                _b_│3241
                                ───┼────
                                _c_│3214
                                 „ │3124
                                 „ │1324
                                ───┼────
                                _d_│1342
                                ───┼────
                                _e_│3142
                                 „ │3412
                                 „ │3421
                                ───┼────
                                _f_│4321
                                ───┼────
                                _g_│4312
                                 „ │4132
                                 „ │1432
                                ───┼────
                                _h_│1423
                                ───┼────
                                _i_│4123
                                 „ │4213
                                 „ │4231
                                ───┼────
                                _k_│2431
                                ───┼────
                                _l_│2413
                                 „ │2143
                                 „ │1243
                                ───┼────
                                _m_│1234


                                  3241
                                 1342
                                  4321
                                 1423
                                  2431
                                 1234

In the preceding twenty four changes, every extream change was made
betwixt the two furthest extream bells from the hunt. I will therefore
here set down an example, where they shall be made between the two
nearest bells, to it. First, the treble hunts up (_a_). The two next
notes to the hunt, which are 3.4, must make an extream change (_b_). The
Treble must hunt down (_c_). The two nearest notes to the hunt, which
are 2.4, must make an extream change (_d_). The Treble hunts up (_e_).
The two nearest extream bells to the hunt, which are 2.3, must make an
extream change (_f_). The Treble hunts down (_g_). The two next extream
bells to the hunt, which are 4.3, must make a change (_h_). And the like
extream changes being made as at (_k_) and (_m_), concludes the peal.

                                   │1234
                                ───┼────
                                _a_│2134
                                 „ │2314
                                 „ │2341
                                ───┼────
                                _b_│2431
                                ───┼────
                                _c_│2413
                                 „ │2143
                                 „ │1243
                                ───┼────
                                _d_│1423
                                ───┼────
                                _e_│4123
                                 „ │4213
                                 „ │4231
                                ───┼────
                                _f_│4321
                                ───┼────
                                _g_│4312
                                 „ │4132
                                 „ │1432
                                ───┼────
                                _h_│1342
                                ───┼────
                                _i_│3142
                                 „ │3412
                                 „ │3421
                                ───┼────
                                _k_│3241
                                ───┼────
                                _l_│3214
                                 „ │3124
                                 „ │1324
                                ───┼────
                                _m_│1234

The six extream changes, _viz._ (_b.d.f.h.k._ and _m._) being set down
by themselves, will stand in this order, as here you see; where ’tis
plain, that 2 3 4 have made the six changes, according to the method of
the last six changes on three bells, _page 49._ where the first change
of that six is made between the last two notes thus, 1 3 2. So in like
manner is the first here thus, 243, which is the same method with that,
though not the same figures.

                                  2431
                                 1423
                                  4321
                                 1342
                                  3241
                                 1234

So that the making of the extream changes two ways in the twenty four,
proceeds from the two ways of making the six changes on three bells.
This last way of making the extream changes, may, for distinction from
the other way, be called _mediums_; which term is very proper, in regard
that the two middlemost of the four notes do always make the extream
change. The extream changes in one peal must all be made alike, that is,
either betwixt the two farthest notes from the hunt, or else betwixt the
two nearest notes to it; but the most usual way is to make them between
the two farthest.

Any note may be made a hunt at pleasure, and its first motion at the
beginning of the peal may be either up or down. The twenty four changes
may be rung sixteen ways according to the aforesaid method, yet the
changes to each are still one and the same; but by making each note a
hunt, and moving it either up or down at the beginning, and also by
making the extream changes two ways, the course of the changes will be
so altered, that the same changes shall not come all along together in
any two of those sixteen ways. With the hunting of one note it may be
rung four ways; for the note may move either up or down at the beginning
of the peal; then in its motion either way the extream changes maybe
made two ways, as before: so that to make each note a hunt, and with
each hunt to ring it four ways makes sixteen in the whole. Wherein ’tis
observable, that the treble-note cannot be moved down at first, nor the
_4th_ up; therefore an extream change must first be made, which is as
effectual as if either note had moved at first. I have here prickt the
twenty four changes three ways, wherein the extream changes are all made
betwixt the two farthest notes from the hunt.

                           _2d. │ _3d. │_4th.
                          down_ │ up_  │ up_
                                │      │
                          _1234_│_1234_│_1234_
                           2134 │ 1243 │ 2134
                           2143 │ 2143 │ 2143
                           1243 │ 2134 │ 2413
                           1423 │ 2314 │ 4213
                           1432 │ 3214 │ 4231
                           4132 │ 3241 │ 2431
                           4123 │ 2341 │ 2341
                           4213 │ 2431 │ 2314
                           2413 │ 2413 │ 3214
                           2431 │ 4213 │ 3241
                           4231 │ 4231 │ 3421
                           4321 │ 4321 │ 4321
                           4312 │ 3421 │ 4312
                           3412 │ 3412 │ 3412
                           3421 │ 4312 │ 3142
                           3241 │ 4132 │ 3124
                           2341 │ 4123 │ 1324
                           2314 │ 1423 │ 1342
                           3214 │ 1432 │ 1432
                           3124 │ 1342 │ 4132
                           3142 │ 3142 │ 4123
                           1342 │ 3124 │ 1423
                           1324 │ 1324 │ 1243
                           1234 │ 1234 │ 1234


                      _The Changes on five Bells._

There are sixscore changes to be rung on five bells; but the Learner may
first practice some shorter peals, as the Ten changes, the twelve, the
Fourteen, the Twenty all over, the Twenty with one hunt, and the Forty
eight.

In the Ten changes the treble must first hunt up (_a_); the 2.3 must
make a change (_b_). The treble must hunt down again (_c_); the 3.2 must
make another change (_d_). The ten changes may also be rung by hunting
down the 5 to lead; then 3.4 to make a change; the 5 to be hunted up
again, and the 4.3 to make another change.

                                  │12345
                               ───┼─────
                               _a_│21345
                                „ │23145
                                „ │23415
                                „ │23451
                               ───┼─────
                               _b_│32451
                               ───┼─────
                               _c_│32415
                                „ │32145
                                „ │31245
                                „ │13245
                               ───┼─────
                               _d_│12345

In the Twelve changes the treble hunts up into the third place, then the
two first notes make a change; the treble hunts down again, then the two
hindmost notes make a change. First the treble hunts into the _3d_ place
(_a_); the two first notes 2.3 make a change (_b_). The treble hunts
down (_c_); the two last notes make a change (_d_); the treble hunts up
(_e_); the two first notes make a change (_f_); the treble hunts down
(_g_); the two last notes make another change (_h_).

                                  │12345
                               ───┼─────
                               _a_│21345
                                „ │23145
                               ───┼─────
                               _b_│32145
                               ───┼─────
                               _c_│31245
                                „ │13245
                               ───┼─────
                               _d_│13254
                               ───┼─────
                               _e_│31254
                                „ │32154
                               ───┼─────
                               _f_│23154
                               ───┼─────
                               _g_│21354
                                „ │12354
                               ───┼─────
                               _h_│12345

In the Fourteen changes, the treble first hunts up behind; then the 5
hunts down to lead; the treble then hunts down again into its own place;
and the fifth also hunts up into its own place.

The Twenty all over are rung in the same manner as the Twelve all over
upon four bells, to which I refer.

In the Twenty changes with one hunt, the hunting note continually hunts
up and down through the other notes, and every time it lies either
before or behind them, an extream change must be made betwixt the two
farthest notes from it. The treble shall be the hunt, and first hunteth
up (_a_). An extream change is made (_b_); the treble hunts down (_c_);
an extream change is made (_d_); which course must be continued to the
end. The extream changes may also be made betwixt the two next notes to
the hunt. Any note may be made a hunt at pleasure, yet still observing
to make the extreams as before.

                                  │12345
                               ───┼─────
                               _a_│21345
                                „ │23145
                                „ │23415
                                „ │23451
                               ───┼─────
                               _b_│32451
                               ───┼─────
                               _c_│32415
                                „ │32145
                                „ │31245
                                „ │13245
                               ───┼─────
                               _d_│13254

In the forty eight changes, the _5th_ and _4th_ are both hunts, and 1 2
3 do make the six changes; the 5.4 do hunt down by turns, and when
either of them leads, then one of the six changes is made. First the 5
hunts down (_a_); one of the six changes is made (_b_); the 5 hunts up
into its own place (_c_); the 4 hunts down (_d_); another of the six
changes is made (_e_); then the 4 must hunt up, and the 5 down again,
_&c._ which course must be continued to the end.

                                  │12345
                               ───┼─────
                               _a_│12354
                                „ │12534
                                „ │15234
                                „ │51234
                               ───┼─────
                               _b_│52134
                               ───┼─────
                               _c_│25134
                                „ │21534
                                „ │21354
                                „ │21345
                               ───┼─────
                               _d_│21435
                                „ │24135
                                „ │42135
                               ───┼─────
                               _e_│42315

In the Sixscore changes, four of the notes do make the Twenty four
changes, and the fifth note hunts continually through them: so that the
course and method of the Sixscore is in effect the same with that of the
Four and twenty. For as the Four and twenty comprehended the Six changes
on three; so in like manner the Sixscore comprehend the Four and twenty
changes on four, and the Six changes on three. Therefore in the Sixscore
there must be two hunts and three extream bells; one of the hunts is
term’d the whole-hunt, and the other the half-hunt, The three extream
bells do make the Six changes in the same manner as they were made
before in the Four and twenty changes upon four bells, and are here also
call’d Extream changes: the half-hunt and three extream bells do make
the Four and twenty changes in the same manner as the Four and twenty
changes on four bells were likewise made: and the whole hunt continually
hunts through those four bells, and every time it either leads or lies
behind them, one change must then be made in the twenty four. 1 shall
here be the whole-hunt, 2 the half-hunt, and 345 extream bells: so that
2345 must make the four and twenty changes. Every extream change shall
be made betwixt the two farthest extream bells from the half-hunt.
First, the treble hunts up (_a_). One of the twenty four changes must
now be made; and therefore 2 which is the hunt in the twenty four, must
begin its motion through the extream bells (_b_). The treble hunts down
(_c_); the half-hunt must proceed in its course (_d_); the whole-hunt
hunts up (_e_); The half-hunt proceeds forward (_f_); the whole-hunt
moves down (_g_). The half-hunt should now proceed, but having finished
its course through the extream bells, therefore an extream change must
now be made betwixt the two farthest extream bells from it, which are
3.4 (_h_). The treble must hunt up (_i_); the half-hunt must now begin
its course again through the extream bells (_k_); treble hunts down
(_l_); the half-hunt proceeds in its course down (_m_); treble hunts up
(_n_); the half-hunt proceeds in its course down (_o_); treble hunts
down (_p_); the half-hunt having finished its course, therefore an
extream change must be made betwixt the two farthest extream bells from
it, which are 3.5 (_q_). The treble hunts up (_r_). The half-hunt begins
its motion again through the extream bells, and first it moves up over
_4th_ (_s_). The whole hunt moves down (_t_); the half-hunt must proceed
in its course, and therefore must move over another note (_v_). And this
method being observed, will produce sixscore changes, and then the bells
will in course come round. Now ’tis observable, that the changes at (_b
d f h k m o q s v x_ and _z_), being set down by themselves, that is,
the 1 to be excluded, and the changes on 2345 to be set directly under
one another in the same successive order as they were made, it will
thereby appear, that those four figures have made twelve changes of the
twenty four, according to the method of the first twenty four changes on
four bells before set down. And whereas here are just half the sixscore
changes prickt down, so likewise here are just half the four and twenty
changes made therein: and the remaining part of this sixscore being
likewise prickt, the remaining part of this four and twenty would also
appear therein, which part being added to the former twelve, would make
up the twenty four changes compleat; and the method of them the same in
all respects with the first twenty four changes on four bells, _page._

                                  │12345
                               ───┼─────
                               _a_│21345
                                „ │23145
                                „ │23415
                                „ │23451
                               ───┼─────
                               _b_│32451
                               ───┼─────
                               _c_│32415
                                „ │32145
                                „ │31245
                                „ │13245
                               ───┼─────
                               _d_│13425
                               ───┼─────
                               _e_│31425
                                „ │34125
                                „ │34215
                                „ │34251
                               ───┼─────
                               _f_│34521
                               ───┼─────
                               _g_│34512
                                „ │34152
                                „ │31452
                                „ │13452
                               ───┼─────
                               _h_│14352
                               ───┼─────
                               _i_│41352
                                „ │43152
                                „ │43512
                                „ │43521
                               ───┼─────
                               _k_│43251
                               ───┼─────
                               _l_│43215
                                „ │43125
                                „ │41325
                                „ │14325
                               ───┼─────
                               _m_│14235
                               ───┼─────
                               _n_│41235
                               ───┼─────
                                „ │42135
                                „ │42315
                                „ │42351
                               ───┼─────
                               _o_│24351
                               ───┼─────
                               _p_│24315
                                „ │24135
                                „ │21435
                                „ │12435
                               ───┼─────
                               _q_│12453
                               ───┼─────
                               _r_│21453
                                „ │24153
                                „ │24513
                                „ │24531
                               ───┼─────
                               _s_│42531
                               ───┼─────
                               _t_│42513
                                „ │42153
                                „ │41253
                                „ │14253
                               ───┼─────
                               _v_│14523
                               ───┼─────
                               _w_│41523
                                „ │45123
                                „ │45213
                                „ │45231
                               ───┼─────
                               _x_│45321
                               ───┼─────
                               _y_│45312
                                „ │45132
                                „ │41532
                                „ │14532
                               ───┼─────
                               _z_│15432

Any note may be made a whole hunt at pleasure, and its first motion at
the beginning of the peal may either be up or down. Any note may also be
made a half-hunt, and its first motion likewise up or down at pleasure;
yet still observing that the half-hunt and three extream bells must make
the twenty four changes, as in this last example. So that in the
sixscore changes the Learner may observe, that the three extream bells
are always assigned for the half-hunt to hunt through; and the half-hunt
and three extream bells are also assigned for the whole-hunt to hunt
through: so that the whole-hunt always hunts through four notes, and the
half-hunt through three. The extream changes may be made two ways;
first, betwixt the two farthest extream bells from the half-hunt, as in
this last example; secondly, betwixt the two next extream bells to the
half-hunt, which may be called _mediums_, for distinction from the
former. But the most usual and easiest way, is to make them betwixt the
two farthest notes from the half-hunt.

Whereas the treble or fifth being made whole-hunts, the first of them
can neither be moved down, nor the last up, at the beginning of a peal;
therefore one of the twenty four changes must first be made, which is as
effectual, as if the treble had moved down, or the 5th up.

The Learner may observe, that two of the four and twenty changes are
never made together in any sixscore, but as soon as one is made, the
whole-hunt moves through the four notes before another can be made.

The sixscore changes may be rung one hundred and sixty ways, which are
thus demonstrable. There are five times four figures to be produced out
of five, and not twice four the same figures: as 1234. 1235. 1245. 1345.
2345. with each four the twenty four changes may be prickt sixteen ways,
as before I have shewed on four bells; so that here will be five times
sixteen four and twenties, which amount to eighty, and not two alike.
Now to each four add the fifth figure which is wanting, as to 1234 add
5, to 1235 add 4, to 1245 add 3, to 1345 add 2, to 2345 add 1, and every
fifth figure being hunted through the sixteen four and twenties, which
the other four make, as the 5 through the sixteen four and twenties
which the 1234 make, and the like of the rest, will produce as many
sixscores as there were four and twenties, that is, 80. Then the whole
hunt may hunt two ways through each four and twenty, that is, up and
down at the beginning, which doubles the former number, and makes 160 in
the whole.


                        _Treble up, fifth down._

      12345  │ 12534  │ 15243  │ 21453  │ —————  │ 14325  │ 13524
      —————  │ 21534  │ 51243  │ 24153  │ 14253  │_Extre._│ 13254
      21345  │ 25134  │ 52143  │ 24513  │ 14523  │ 13425  │ —————
      23145  │ 25314  │ 52413  │ 24531  │ —————  │ —————  │ 13245
      23415  │ 25341  │ 52431  │ 24351  │ 15423  │ 13452  │_Extre._
      23451  │ 52341  │ 25431  │ 24315  │_Extre._│ 13542  │ 12345
      23541  │ 52314  │ 25413  │ 24135  │ 15432  │ —————  │
      23514  │ 52134  │ 25143  │ 21435  │ —————  │ 15342  │
      23154  │ 51234  │ 21543  │ 12435  │ 14532  │_Extre._│
      21354  │ 15234  │ 12543  │_Extre._│ 14352  │ 15324  │
      12354  │_Extre._│ 12453  │ 14235  │ —————  │ —————  │


                       _Treble up, fourth down._

      12345  │ 12435  │ 41253  │ 21543  │ 52134  │ —————  │ 14325
      —————  │ 14235  │ 14253  │ 12543  │ 51234  │ 15342  │ 13425
      21345  │ 41235  │ 12453  │ 12534  │ 15234  │ 15324  │ —————
      23145  │ 42135  │ 21453  │ 21534  │ 15243  │ —————  │ 13245
      23415  │ 42315  │ 24153  │ 25134  │ —————  │ 13524  │ 13254
      23451  │ 42351  │ 24513  │ 25314  │ 15423  │ 13542  │ —————
      24351  │_Extre._│ 24531  │ 25341  │ 14523  │ —————  │ 12354
      24315  │ 42531  │ 25431  │_Extre._│ —————  │ 13452  │ 12345
      24135  │ 42513  │ 25413  │ 52341  │ 14532  │ 14352  │ —————
      21435  │ 42153  │ 25143  │ 52314  │ 15432  │ —————  │


                       _Second down, fourth up._

          12345  │ 31524  │ 34125  │ 43512  │ 35412  │_Extre._
          —————  │ 31254  │ 34215  │ 43521  │ 35421  │ 53142
          21345  │ 32154  │ 32415  │ 43251  │ 35241  │ 53124
          21354  │ 23154  │ 23415  │ 42351  │ 32541  │ 53214
          12354  │ 23145  │ 24315  │ 24351  │ 23541  │ 52314
          13254  │ 32145  │ 42315  │ 23451  │ 23514  │ 25314
          13524  │ 31245  │ 43215  │ 32415  │ 32514  │ 25341
          13542  │ 31425  │ 43125  │ 34251  │ 35214  │ 52341
         _Extre._│ 31452  │ 43152  │ 34521  │ 35124  │ 53241
          31542  │ 34152  │_Extre._│ 34512  │ 35142  │ _&c._

In ringing terms the hunts are named in short, as in the peals here
prickt. The first which is named is here understood to be the
whole-hunt, and the last the half-hunt. For instance, Treble is the
whole-hunt, and fifth the half-hunt; and treble is the whole-hunt, and
fourth the half-hunt, _&c._


                      _The Changes on six Bells._

There are seven hundred and twenty changes to be rung of six bells. But
the Learner may first practice some shorter peals.

The twenty four changes are thus rung. The treble must continually hunt
through the rest of the notes, and every time it leads or lies behind
them, an extream change must then be made between the two farthest notes
from it. The treble hunts up (_a_). A change is made betwixt the two
farthest notes from it, which are 2.3 (_b_). The treble hunts down
(_c_). An extream change is made betwixt 5.6 (_d_), which method must be
continued to the end. Any note may be made a hunt at pleasure, and the
extream changes may as well be made betwixt the two nearest notes to the
hunt. The Thirty-all-over are rung according to the method of the Twelve
all over upon four bells, to which I refer.

                                  │123456
                               ───┼──────
                               _a_│213456
                                „ │231456
                                „ │234156
                                „ │234516
                                „ │234561
                               ───┼──────
                               _b_│324561
                               ───┼──────
                               _c_│324516
                                „ │324156
                                „ │321456
                                „ │312456
                                „ │132456
                               ───┼──────
                               _d_│132465

The thirty six changes are thus rung. The treble hunts up into the third
place, and then the two first notes make a change. The treble hunts down
again to lead, and then the two notes in the _3d_ and _4th_ places do
make a change, except the 2 lies next the treble, and then the two
hindmost notes. The treble hunts up (_a_). The two first notes make a
change (_b_). The treble hunts down (_c_); the 2.4 make a change (_d_).
In which manner the changes are to be made untill the treble leads, and
the 2 (which may be term’d the half-hunt) lies next it, and then the
extream change is made behind, as in the last change of this example,
there being but two of these changes in the peal.

                                  │123456
                               ───┼──────
                               _a_│213456
                                „ │231456
                               ───┼──────
                               _b_│321456
                               ───┼──────
                               _c_│312456
                                „ │132456
                               ───┼──────
                               _d_│134256
                               ───┼──────
                               _e_│314256
                                „ │341256
                               ───┼──────
                               _f_│431256
                               ───┼──────
                               _g_│413256
                                „ │143256
                               ───┼──────
                               _h_│142356
                               ───┼──────
                               _i_│412356
                                „ │421356
                               ───┼──────
                               _k_│241356
                               ───┼──────
                               _l_│214356
                                „ │124356
                               ───┼──────
                               _m_│124365
                                  │_&c._

In the Twelvescore long-hunts, (otherwise called the _Esquire’s
twelvescore_); the _6th_ and _5th_ are hunts, and 1234 do make the
twenty four changes. The _6th_ and _5th_ do hunt down by turns, and when
either of them leads, one of the twenty four changes must then be made.
The course and method of this is the same with that of the forty eight
changes on five bells, to which I refer the Learner.

In the Sevenscore and four, the treble and tenor are both hunts; and
2345 do make the twenty four changes, 2 being the hunt therein. The
treble and tenor do both hunt at one and the same time, the one up, and
the other down, crossing each others course; and when one of them leads,
the other always lies behind; at which time one of the twenty four
changes must be made. The extream changes in this peal are made in the
same manner as before I have shewed upon four bells. The treble hunts
up, and the tenor down (_a_). One of the twenty four changes is made
(_b_). The treble hunts down, and the tenor up (_c_). Another of the
twenty four changes is made (_d_). The treble hunts up, and the tenor
down (_e_), _&c._ which method must be observed to the end.

                                  │123456
                               ───┼──────
                               _a_│213465
                                „ │231645
                                „ │236145
                                „ │263415
                                „ │623451
                               ───┼──────
                               _b_│632451
                               ───┼──────
                               _c_│362415
                                „ │326145
                                „ │321645
                                „ │312465
                                „ │132456
                               ───┼──────
                               _d_│134256
                               ───┼──────
                               _e_│314265
                                „ │341625
                                „ │346125
                                „ │364215
                                „ │634251
                               ───┼──────
                               _f_│634521
                                  │_&c._

In the sixscore changes there is a whole-hunt, a half-hunt, and four
extream bells. The half-hunt and four extream bells do make the twenty
changes in the same manner as the twenty changes were made upon five
bells with one hunt. _page 61._ The whole hunt hath a continual motion
through the other five notes, and every time it leads and lies behind
them, one of the twenty changes must then be made. In this example,
treble is the whole-hunt, 2 the half-hunt, and 3456 extream bells;
therefore 23456 must make the twenty changes wherein 2 is the hunt, and
every time it lies either before the four extream bells, or behind them,
an extream change must then be made, which here shall be betwixt the two
farthest extream bells from the half-hunt. The treble hunts up (_a_).
One of the twenty changes must now be made, therefore 2 being the hunt
in it, must begin its course through the extream bells (_b_). The treble
hunts down (_c_); The half-hunt proceeds forward (_d_); the treble hunts
up (_e_); the half-hunt proceeds forward in its course (_f_); the treble
hunts down (_g_); the 2 proceeds forward (_h_); the treble hunts up
(_i_); the half-hunt should now proceed forward, but its course through
the extream bells being finished, therefore an extream change must be
made betwixt 3.4, which are the two farthest extream bells from it,
(_k_). The treble must hunt down (_l_); the half-hunt must now go its
course again through the extream bells, and first it moves down under
the _6th_, (_m_) _&c._ which method must be continued to the end. Any
note may be made a whole hunt at pleasure, or a half-hunt also. And the
extream changes may be made betwixt the two nearest extream notes to the
half-hunt; but withall observing to make all the extreams in one peal
alike. There are four extream changes in each peal, and thirty changes
distance from one to another.

                                  │123456
                               ───┼──────
                               _a_│213456
                                „ │231456
                                „ │234156
                                „ │234516
                                „ │234561
                               ───┼──────
                               _b_│324561
                               ───┼──────
                               _c_│324516
                                „ │324156
                                „ │321456
                                „ │312456
                                „ │132456
                               ───┼──────
                               _d_│134256
                               ───┼──────
                               _e_│314256
                                „ │341256
                                „ │342156
                                „ │342516
                                „ │342561
                               ───┼──────
                               _f_│345261
                               ───┼──────
                               _g_│345216
                                „ │345126
                                „ │341526
                                „ │314526
                                „ │134526
                               ───┼──────
                               _h_│134562
                               ───┼──────
                               _i_│314562
                                „ │341562
                                „ │345162
                                „ │345612
                                „ │345621
                               ───┼──────
                               _k_│435621
                               ───┼──────
                               _l_│435612
                                „ │435162
                                „ │431562
                                „ │413562
                                „ │143562
                               ───┼──────
                               _m_│143526
                                  │_&c._

The method of the Seven hundred and twenty, hath an absolute dependency
upon the method of the Sixscore changes on five bells; for five of the
notes are to make the sixscore changes, and the sixth note hunts
continually through them, and every time it leads or lies behind them,
one of the Sixscore changes must then be made. The method of the Seven
hundred and Twenty is in effect the same with that of the Sixscore: for
as the Sixscore comprehended the Twenty four changes on four, and the
Six on three; so likewise the Seven hundred and twenty comprehend the
Sixscore changes on five, the Twenty four changes on four, and the Six
changes on three. Therefore here must be three Hunts, and three Extream
bells: the three Hunts are thus distinguished; one of them is call’d the
_whole-hunt_, another the _half-hunt_, and the other the _quarter-hunt_.
The Half-hunt, Quarter-hunt, and three Extream bells, are to make the
Sixscore changes; the Quarter-hunt and three Extream bells are to make
the Twenty four changes, and the three Extream bells are to make the
_six_ changes, which are here also called _extream_ changes, and made in
the same manner as before I have shewed upon four bells. In this example
here prickt, _treble_ is the _whole-hunt_, _2d_ the _half-hunt_, _3d_
the _quarter-hunt_, and _4 5 6_ _extream_ bells. Now ’tis observable,
that 4 5 6 are to make the six _extream_ changes, which will divide the
_seven hundred and twenty_ into six equal parts; the 3 4 5 6 are to make
the _twenty four_ changes, wherein the _3d_ is the _hunt_, (but in the
_seven hundred and twenty_ ’tis call’d the _quarter-hunt_;) and 2 3 4 5
6 are to make the _sixscore_ changes, wherein the _2d_ is the
_whole-hunt_ (though in the 720 ’tis call’d the _half-hunt_,) by which
’tis evident, that the _treble_ continually hunts through these five 2 3
4 5 6, the _2d_ through the four 3 4 5 6, and the _3d_ through these
three 4 5 6; which are assigned for the respective _hunts_ to hunt
through, from the beginning to the end of the peal. First the _treble_
hunts up (_a_). Now one of the _sixscore_ changes must be made,
therefore the _2d_ being the _hunt_ in the _sixscore_, must begin its
course through the other four notes (_b_). The _treble_ hunts down
(_c_); the _2d_ proceeds in its course (_d_); the _treble_ hunts up
(_e_). The _2d_ proceedeth forward in its course (_f_); the _treble_
hunts down (_g_); the _2d_ proceeds forward (_h_); the _treble_ hunts up
(_i_); the _2d_, which is the _half-hunt_, should now proceed forward,
but having finished its course through the four bells, therefore the
_3d_, which is the _quarter-hunt_, must begin its motion through the
_extream_ bells (_k_). The _treble_ hunts down (_l_). The _half-hunt_
must now begin its course again through the four bells, and first
therefore it moves down under the 6 (_m_). The _treble_ must hunt up
again, and then the _2d_ must move down under another bell, which method
must be observed untill the _2d_ has moved quite down through the four
bells again, and then the _3d_ must proceed forward by moving over
another of the _extream_ bells; which method must be observed in the
motion of the three _hunts_, until the _quarter-hunt_ hath moved up
behind the _extream_ bells, and then the _whole_ and _half-hunts_,
having gone their course again through the bells, an _extream_ change
must be made: after which the _whole_, _half_, and _quarter-hunts_
proceed again in their course as before.

                                  │123456
                               ───┼──────
                               _a_│213456
                                „ │231456
                                „ │234156
                                „ │234516
                                „ │234561
                               ───┼──────
                               _b_│324561
                               ───┼──────
                               _c_│324516
                                „ │324156
                                „ │321456
                                „ │312456
                                „ │132456
                               ───┼──────
                               _d_│134256
                               ───┼──────
                               _e_│314256
                                „ │341256
                                „ │342156
                                „ │342516
                                „ │342561
                               ───┼──────
                               _f_│345261
                               ───┼──────
                               _g_│345216
                                „ │345126
                                „ │341526
                                „ │314526
                                „ │134526
                               ───┼──────
                               _h_│134562
                               ───┼──────
                               _i_│314562
                                „ │341562
                                „ │345162
                                „ │345612
                                „ │345621
                               ───┼──────
                               _k_│435621
                               ───┼──────
                               _l_│435612
                                „ │435162
                                „ │431562
                                „ │413562
                                „ │143562
                               ───┼──────
                               _m_│143526

The letter _h_ standing by the figures signifies _half-hunt_, that is,
the motion of the _half-hunt_ in that change; and likewise _q_ the
_quarter-hunt_. Here are the first _sixscore_ changes of a _seven
hundred and twenty_; wherein ’tis observable, that all the changes at
_h_ and _q_ being set down by themselves in the same successive order as
they were made, that is, the 1 to be excluded, and the changes on the
other five figures to be set down directly under one another, and the
_extream_ change at last, it will thereby appear, that the five figures
have made twenty changes of a _sixscore_, according to the method of the
example on five bells, _page 63._ with this only difference, these are
made on 23456, and those were made on 12345; but the five figures of
each have both alike course, the _2d_ and _3d_ going the same course in
this, as the _treble_ and _2d_ did in that. Now whereas the _sixscore_
changes here prickt down are a sixth part of the _seven hundred_ and
_twenty_, so likewise are the _twenty changes_, here made by 23456, a
sixth part of the _sixscore_: and then consequently, the _seven hundred_
and _twenty_ changes being all prickt, the _sixscore_ changes on 23456
would plainly appear therein, in the same manner as twenty of them
appear in this _sixscore_. Therefore more need not be said of the method
of the 720, since the method of the _sixscore_ changes on five bells
being well understood, will be a sure and certain guide to the Learner:
only this one thing farther; in ringing of this peal with any _hunts_,
the second _extream_ change being made between the two bells which made
the first _extream_, will always bring the bells round at the end of the
_twelvescore_. But after _twelvescore_ are made, they cannot in course
be brought round until the end of the 720.

             │_123456_│   │        │   │        │   │
             │ 213456 │   │ 435612 │   │ 214536 │   │ 456312
             │ 231456 │   │ 435162 │   │ 241536 │   │ 456132
             │ 234156 │   │ 431562 │   │ 245136 │   │ 451632
             │ 234516 │   │ 413562 │   │ 245316 │   │ 415632
             │ 234561 │   │ 143562 │   │ 245361 │   │ 145632
          _h_│ 324561 │_h_│ 143526 │_h_│ 425361 │_h_│ 145623
             │ 324516 │   │ 413526 │   │ 425316 │   │ 415623
             │ 324156 │   │ 431526 │   │ 425136 │   │ 451623
             │ 321456 │   │ 435126 │   │ 421536 │   │ 456123
             │ 312456 │   │ 435216 │   │ 412536 │   │ 456213
             │ 132456 │   │ 435261 │   │ 142536 │   │ 456231
          _h_│ 134256 │_h_│ 432561 │_h_│ 145236 │_h_│ 452631
             │ 314256 │   │ 432516 │   │ 415236 │   │ 452613
             │ 341256 │   │ 432156 │   │ 451236 │   │ 452163
             │ 342156 │   │ 431256 │   │ 452136 │   │ 451263
             │ 342516 │   │ 413256 │   │ 452316 │   │ 415263
             │ 342561 │   │ 143256 │   │ 452361 │   │ 145263
          _h_│ 345261 │_h_│ 142356 │_h_│ 453261 │_h_│ 142563
             │ 345216 │   │ 412356 │   │ 453216 │   │ 412563
             │ 345126 │   │ 421356 │   │ 453126 │   │ 421563
             │ 341526 │   │ 423156 │   │ 451326 │   │ 425163
             │ 314526 │   │ 423516 │   │ 415326 │   │ 425613
             │ 134526 │   │ 423561 │   │ 145326 │   │ 425631
          _h_│ 134562 │_h_│ 243561 │_h_│ 145362 │_h_│ 245631
             │ 314562 │   │ 243516 │   │ 415362 │   │ 245613
             │ 341562 │   │ 243156 │   │ 451362 │   │ 245163
             │ 345162 │   │ 241356 │   │ 453162 │   │ 241563
             │ 345612 │   │ 214356 │   │ 453612 │   │ 214563
             │ 345621 │   │ 124356 │   │ 453621 │   │ 124563
          _q_│ 435621 │_q_│ 124536 │_q_│ 456321 │   │ Extre.
             │        │   │        │   │        │   │ 125463

The 720 changes may be rung one thousand nine hundred and twenty several
ways, which is thus demonstrable. There are six times five figures to be
produced out of six, and not twice five the same: as 12345. 12346.
12356. 12456. 13456. 23456. and with each five the _sixscore_ changes
may be prickt one hundred and sixty ways, as before I have shewed on
five bells. Now to each five add the sixth figure which is wanting, as
to 12345 add 6, to 12346 add 5, to 12456 add 3, to 13456 add 2, and to
23456 add 1. And the sixth figure which is added, being hunted through
all the several _sixscores_ which the other five figures make; for
instance, the 6 through the 160 several _sixscores_ which 12345 make,
and the 5 also through the 160 several _sixscores_, which 12346 make,
and the like of the rest; will produce as many _seven hundred_ and
_twenties_ as there are _sixscores_, that is, six times one hundred and
sixty, which amounts to nine hundred and sixty. Then the note that hunts
through the other five, may hunt two ways through each _sixscore_, that
is, up and down, which will double the former number, and make nineteen
hundred and twenty in the whole.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                            AN INTRODUCTION
                          to the Knowledge of
                            _CROSSE PEALS_.


These Peals are term’d _cross_ in respect of their intricate methods;
wherein several notes moving at one and the same time, do thwart or
_cross_ each other in their course and motion, some moving up, others at
the same time down, gives this Denomination to the Peals. The end of
pricking them is to make the compleat number of changes by a method
differing from that of other Peals. For although five can be varied but
120 ways, and six but 720 _&c._ yet the methods by which they are
varied, are differing, according to the several fancies of the Artist.
And as order and method are the only _basis_ on which this Art is
founded; so the skilful Artists, the better to effect the aforesaid end,
have thought fit in most peals to appoint one note to be as it were a
Helm or Rudder, by which the course of the peal is steered; which note
is term’d a _Hunt_, and hath one constant uniform motion throughout the
peal, differing from that of the other notes. The manner of its motion
is continually through the other notes, that is, from leading to strike
behind, and from thence again to lead, which motion, first up and then
down, is term’d one compleat Course. Some peals upon five bells, as _old
Doubles_, _&c._ consist of single Courses; there being ten changes in
every single Course, and twelve of those Courses in the peal. Other
peals upon five bells, as _London Paradox_, _&c._ consist of double
Courses; there being twenty changes in every double Course, and six of
those Courses in the peal. Upon six bells there are also single and
double Courses, _viz._ twelve changes in every single Course, as in
_Grandsire Bob_ _&c._ and twenty four changes in every double Course, as
in _Colledg Bob_, _&c._ the change wherein the _Hunt_ leaves leading
being the first change of every Course. Now the methods of these peals
being well considered, they will be found more easie than at the first
view they may seem to be; for the first Course of any Cross Peal being
judiciously viewed, the general method of the whole peal will thereby
appear: for all the Courses in a Cross peal do agree in these three
respects. First, in the motion of the _Hunt_; secondly, in the motion of
the rest of the notes; thirdly, in the making of the changes, which will
plainly appear in the following peals, (some few changes in each peal
only excepted, as hereafter I shall shew in my Directions to the several
peals:) for proof of which I will give an instance in the peal of new
Doubles upon five bells, these being the three first Courses of the
peal. Wherein ’tis observable, that the last change of the first Course
which is 13524, I have set down again at the top of the second Course;
and likewise the last change of the second Course which is 15432, I have
also put at the top of the third course; which I have done for the
plainer Demonstration of what I here intend. So that the ten lowermost
changes are the ten changes of each Course.

                          First │  2d  │  3d
                          Course│Course│Course
                                │      │
                          12345 │13524 │15432
                          ──────┼──────┼──────
                          21354 │31542 │51423
                          23145 │35124 │54132
                          32415 │53214 │45312
                          23451 │35241 │54321
                          32541 │53421 │45231
                          23514 │35412 │54213
                          32154 │53142 │45123
                          31245 │51324 │41532
                          13254 │15342 │14523
                          13524 │15432 │14253

First therefore, as to the motion of the _hunt_, the 1 which is the
_hunt_ moves directly up behind, where it lieth twice, and then down
again to lead, where it lieth also twice; as appears in each of these
three Courses, and the like also throughout the peal.

Secondly, as the _2d_, _3d_, _4th_, and _5th_ bells move through the
first Course, so the bells that lie in the _2d_, _3d_, _4th_, and _5th_
places in the last change of every course, moves in the same manner also
through the next following course. For instance; first, for the bell in
the _2d_ place: in the first course the _2d_ bell moves down to lead,
where it lieth twice, and then dodges untill the _treble_ comes down to
it. So likewise in the second course, the _3d_ bell lying in the _2d_
place moves down to lead, where it lies twice, and then dodges until
_treble_ comes down to it; and also in the third course, the _5th_ bell
lying in the _2d_ place, moves down to lead where it lieth twice, and
dodgeth until the _treble_ moves down to it. Secondly, for the bell in
the _3d_ place. In the first course the _3d_ bell moves down to lead,
and there dodgeth untill the _treble_ comes down to it: so likewise in
the second course the _5th_ bell lying in the _3d_ place moves down to
lead, and there dodgeth untill the _treble_ comes down to it: and also
in the _3d_ course the _4th_ bell lying in the _3d_ place moves down to
lead, and there dodgeth until the _treble_ comes down to it. Thirdly,
for the bell in the fourth place: In the first course, the fourth bell
moves up behind, then down into the _3d_ place where it lieth twice,
then up again behind; so likewise in the second course, the _2d_ bell
lying in the _4th_ place moves up behind, then down into the _3d_ place
where it lieth twice, then up again behind; and also in the third course
the _3d_ bell lying in the _4th_ place, moves therefore up behind, then
down into the _3d_ place where it lieth twice, then up again behind. And
such uniform motion also hath the bell in the _5th_ place through every
course.

Thirdly, that the changes in all the courses of the peal are made alike,
will here also plainly appear in the three courses. For the first change
of every course is made on the two first and two last bells; the second
change of every course is made on the four last; the third is made on
the four first; the fourth on the two first and two last; the fifth on
the four first; the sixth on the two first and two last; the seventh on
the four first; the eighth on the four last; the ninth on the two first
and two last; and the tenth single.

And thus in every Cross-peal the Courses do all agree, first in the
motion of the Hunt, secondly in the motion of the rest of the notes, and
thirdly in the making of the changes, as before I have showed. So that
these three things being well observed, will be very helpful both in
pricking and ringing them; the first and third being most proper to
direct the pricking of them, and the first and second the ringing of
them. Therefore if the Practitioner do but observe how the changes are
made in the first course of a peal, wherein he must have particular
regard to the motion of the Hunt, (with a little further help from the
following directions to each peal, as to the making of _Extreams_ and
Bob-changes) he may easily prick down all the following Courses of the
same peals and therefore in the following peals I have onely prickt down
two or three of the first courses for an example, and then have abridged
the rest of the peal by setting down only the changes that are made at
the leadings of the Hunt. But note, there are some few _Cambridg_-peals
upon five bells, wherein all the courses of each peal do not agree in
the aforesaid three respects: For although as to the motion of the
_whole-hunt_ they do, yet in the motion of the rest of the notes, and
consequently in the making of the changes they do not.

It being very difficult to begin the following peals with cross _hunts_,
that is, to make the _2d_, _3d_, _4th_ _&c._ whole-hunts, I will
therefore set down a general rule for making the first changes at the
beginning of each Peal, wherein consists the great difficulty. In any
Cross-peal the _whole-hunt_ may move either up or down at the beginning;
and the motion of the _whole-hunt_ in the first course of each of the
following peals will direct the first motion of any cross _hunt_, and
consequently of making the first changes in that peal. For Example,
admit the _4th_ were made the _whole-hunt_ in the peal called _Old
doubles and singles_ upon five bells, and to _hunt_ up at first: now to
know how to make the first changes, observe how the change is made
wherein the treble (which is there the _whole-hunt_) moves up out of the
_4th_ place, and in the same manner must the change be made wherein the
_4th_ bell also moves up out of that place: therefore as the change
wherein the treble moves up out of the _4th_ place is a _single_ behind;
so likewise must the change wherein the _4th_ bell moves up out of that
place, be also a _single_ behind thus, 12354: and then as the next
change wherein the treble lieth still behind is double of the four first
bells; so likewise the next change wherein the _4th_ bell lieth still
behind, must also be made on the four first, thus, 21534, _&c._ Or admit
the _4th_ were to hunt down at the beginning, then observe how the
change is made wherein the treble hunts down out of the _4th_ place, and
so in like manner must the change be made wherein the _4th_ hunts also
down out of that place: therefore as the change wherein the treble hunts
down out of the _4th_ place, is double of the four first bells; so
likewise must the change wherein the _4th_ bell hunts down out of that
place, be also double of the four first thus, 21435; then as the
_treble_ makes a _single_ when it moves down out of the _3d_ place, so
likewise must the _4th_ next make a single change in moving down out of
the _3d_ place thus 24135, _&c._ which observations will guide the
making of the first changes in any cross peal with any Hunts; but
observe whensoever the first change of any peal happens to be single, it
must be made at the back-stroke to prevent cutting compass; and the like
when a double change happens first in a peal of Triples and Doubles. And
moreover by the way observe, that all the following peals are so prickt,
that in ringing them at half-pulls, if the first change of each peal is
made at the fore-stroke, the single changes in each peal will always be
made at the back-stroke; and also the double changes in Triples and
Doubles, excepting some few Single in two or three peals. But when it
happens that the first change of a peal is made at the back-stroke, then
consequently the bells at the end of the peal will come round at a
fore-stroke change.

In such peals on five bells where _singles_ are made in the _3d_ and
_4th_ places at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_, the _extreams_ may
there be made three ways in each peal; _viz._ every time the _half-hunt_
lieth next to the _whole-hunt_; secondly, every time it lieth behind;
thirdly, every time the _half-hunt_ lieth next the _whole-hunt_, and
also behind: in this last way there are six _extreams_ in each peal, but
in other ways only three in each; the _extreams_ being always made when
the _whole-hunt_ leads, and betwixt the two farthest _extream_ bells
from the _half-hunt_.

In such peals upon five bells wherein there are three _extreams_, and
made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_;
the rest of the _singles_ at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_ may be
made two ways in each peal, _viz._ either in the _2d_ and _3d_, or the
_4th_ and _5th_ places; if they are made in the _2d_ and _3d_, then the
_extreams_ must be made when the _half-hunt_ lyeth behind; but if the
_singles_ are made behind, then the _extreams_ must be made when the
_half-hunt_ lieth next the _whole-hunt_, the _extreams_ being always
made between the two next _extream_ bells to the _half-hunt_.

In all the following peals the figures standing by themselves at the
title of the peal, are the _hunts_ in the peal there prickt: for
instance, in the first _cross-peal_ upon five bells call’d _Old doubles
and singles_, the two figures standing thus _1 and 2_, are the _hunts_
in that peal; 1 is the _whole-hunt_, 2 the _half-hunt_, and the like of
the rest.

All peals of _doubles_ upon five bells, which go sixty changes compleat
without any _single_, by making of two _extreams_ they will go 120. And
also all peals of _doubles_ upon six bells, and _triples_ and _doubles_
upon six, which go 360 changes without any _single_ or _extreme_, by
making of two _extreams_ they will go 720. The _extreams_ in all these
compleat peals proceeding from one and the same cause, are therefore to
be made after one manner, according to this general and infallible rule:
Wheresoever any two of the _extream_ bells are in course to make a
change, those two bells by lying still will effectually make the
_extream_. So that the making of the _extream_ in _doubles_ upon five
bells, necessitates the making of a _single change_ at the same time, by
reason that the two _extream_ bells which should contribute to the
making of the _double_ change, do lie still; so that the _single_ change
is accidental, and very improperly called the _extream_. When the
_extreams_ in _triples_ and _doubles_ upon six bells are made at
_double_ changes, then there happens two _singles_ in the peal; but when
they are made at _triple_ changes, then those two changes will become
_double_, and consequently the 720 will then go compleat without any
_single_. Upon five bells the first _extream_ must be made within sixty
changes from the beginning, and the second _extream_ just sixty changes
from the first. Upon six bells the first _extream_ must be made within
360 changes from the beginning, and the second _extream_ just 360
changes from the first. The easiest way in practice, is to make the
_extremes_ at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_; wherein it may be
observed as a general rule, That in all peals upon six bells, where the
_half-hunt_ dodgeth behind at the _bobs_, there the first _extream_ may
be made either the first, second, or third time: the _half_ and
_quarter-hunts_ dodg together behind, and then the second _extream_ must
be made the third time those two bells dodg again together behind, after
the first _extream_ is made. And also in all such peals upon six bells,
where the _doubles_ at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_ are made on the
four middle bells, there the first _extream_ may be made either the
first, second, or third time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ do make a
change in the _2d_ and _3d_ places, and then the _2d_ _extream_ must be
made the third time those two bells come there again to make a change
after the first _extream_ is made. The _singles_ at all these _extreams_
must be made by the _half_ and _quarter-hunt_. The first _extream_ in
any peal may also be made at any place, where two of the _extream_ bells
are in course to made a change according to the preceding general rule;
and then the making of the second _extream_ may be guided by
observations taken from the changes at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_:
for at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_ the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_
always come together to make a change in one place, just at 120 changes
distance from one another throughout each peal. Now as the second
_extream_ must be made just 360 changes from the first, so the making of
it may thus be guided: Look how many changes, or else how many leadings
of the _whole-hunt_ the first _extream_ is made after the _half_ and
_quarter-hunts_ have made a change together, so many changes or leadings
of the _whole-hunt_ must the second _extream_ be made, after the third
following time that those two bells do made a change in the same place
again. And likewise in all peals, where there are single and double
_bobs_, the same observations will also hold good, in making the
_extreams_ either after the single or double _bobs_ as before; there
being likewise 120 changes distance between the single _bobs_ and also
between the double _bobs_: so that if the first _extream_ is made at a
single _bob_, the second must then be made at the third following single
_bob_, and the like also at double _bobs_. And such kind of
observations, according to the nature of the peal, will guide the making
of the second _extream_ in any peal, either upon five or six bells.
Wherein ’tis observable, that the second _extream_ must always be made
by the same two bells, and in the same place where the first was made,
which two bells will in course lie apt for that purpose; and the rest of
the bells will also in course lie in the same places at the second
_extream_ where they lay at the first. After the making of the first
_extream_, the method of the peal goeth on as if no _extream_ had been
made; and also after the making of the second _extream_ if any
remaineth, it also goes on, until in course the bells come round.

In all compleat peals of _doubles_ upon six bells there may also
moveable _extreams_ be made, which are made according to this rule;
wheresoever any two of the _extream_ bells are together, and in course
to lie still, those two bells by making a change will thereby make the
_extream_, which is as effectual as the fixed _extream_, the reason and
ground of both being one and the same. There are also two of these
_extreams_ in the peal, and the second always made 360 changes from the
first, and the making of it guided by such kind of observations as
before. When moveable _extreams_ are made, then there will be two triple
changes in the 720; but when fixed _extreams_ are made, then two
_singles_.

The art of _cross-pricking_ may receive a being from this consideration.
As every compleat peal of plain changes upon one number comprehends the
compleat peals on all lesser numbers; so likewise every compleat
_cross-peal_ must of necessity do the like, although their cross course
permits it not to be done so regularly and demonstrably as the former.
From whence may be inferr’d, that every note in a _cross-peal_ must of
necessity lie as many times in one place, as the rest of the notes are
capable of making changes; and also that two or more of the notes must
jointly lie in the same places as many times, as the remaining number
are also capable of making changes: this being a certain touchstone to
prove all _cross-peals_ after they are prickt, and must be held as a
principle on which to ground such methods of pricking, that the course
of all the notes may demonstrably tend to produce those effects. And
from hence it is, that the whole _hunt_ immediately derives the manner
of its uniform motion through the courses of each peal. And the changes
in every course are as so many guides to conduct the rest of the notes
in such sort, that they may be prepared to lie at the last change of the
course in apt places for each succeeding course to receive them, and to
perform the like. Now as the changes in all the courses of a peal are
made alike, except as before; so in the composing of _cross-peals_, by
pricking of one course may soon be discovered, whether or no a compleat
Peal will from thence arise.

                  *       *       *       *       *




                             _Cross Peals._


         _The Twenty four, Doubles and Singles on four Bells._

This peal consists equally of _double_ and _single_ changes; one change
is _double_, the next _single_, and so throughout. 1 is here the _hunt_,
and 2.3.4 _extream_ bells. Every _double_ change is made on the two
first and two last bells, and every _single_ on the two middle bells,
except when the 1 leads, and then behind which is call’d _extream_. All
the bells have a direct Hunting course up and down until 1 leads, and
then the bell in the second place lyeth still, whilst the two hind-bells
make a dodg; which being made, all the bells proceed again in their
Hunting course. The three changes of (_a.b.c_) are the three _extream_
changes.

                                   _1234_
                                    2143
                                    2413
                                    4231
                                    4321
                                    3412
                                    3142
                                    1324
                               _a_  1342
                                    3124
                                    3214
                                    2341
                                    2431
                                    4213
                                    4123
                                    1432
                               _b_  1423
                                    4132
                                    4312
                                    3421
                                    3241
                                    2314
                                    2134
                                    1243
                               _c_  1234

There are three ways to make the _extream_ changes. First, every time
the _hunt_ leads, as in the peal here prickt; secondly, every time it
lies behind; thirdly, every time it leads and lies behind: in this last
way there are six _extream_ changes in the peal, but in the other two
ways, only three _extreams_; the _extream_ changes must always be made
betwixt the two farthest bells from the _hunt_. Any bell may _hunt_ at
pleasure, and it may move either up or down at the beginning of the
peal. If the _1st_ or _3d_ do _hunt_ down, or the _2d_ or _4th_ up at
the beginning, the first change must be _single_, and made of the
back-stroke (if ’tis rung at half-pulls) to prevent cutting compass; but
if either of those bells do _hunt_ the contrary way, then the first
change must be double.


                  _Old Doubles and Singles. 1 and 2._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. The treble
hath a direct hunting course, as in plain changes. Every _double_ change
is on the four first bells, and the treble is one of the two bells that
makes every _single_ change, except when it leads, and then the _single_
is in the _3d_ and _4th_ places; but when 2 lies next the treble, then
the _single_ is behind, which is call’d _extream_. Every time the treble
leaves leading, the two first bells continue slow dodging, until the
treble comes down and displaceth them. And when the treble moves down
out of the _5th_ place, the bell that comes into it lies still there,
untill the treble comes thither again, except when the _extream_ change
is made behind. Every bell lies twice together in the _3d_ and _4th_
places, except when the treble leads, and also when it hinders them in
hunting.

                       _12345_ │ 51432  │ —————
                        21435  │ 15342  │ 12543
                        24135  │ 15432  │_Extre._
                        42315  │ —————  │ 12534
                        42351  │ 13254  │ —————
                        24531  │ 13524  │ 13425
                        24513  │ —————  │ 13245
                        42153  │ 12435  │ —————
                        41253  │_Extre._│ 14532
                        14523  │ 12453  │ 14352
                        14253  │ —————  │ —————
                        41523  │ 15324  │ 15243
                        45123  │ 15234  │ 15423
                        54213  │ —————  │ —————
                        54231  │ 13452  │ 12354
                        45321  │ 13542  │_Extre._
                        45312  │ 14235  │ 12345
                        54132  │ 14325  │

This old peal may be rung by a new course, which differs from the former
only in the _single_ changes that are made every time the _whole-hunt_
leads, _viz._ every _single_ may be made either in the _2d_ and _3d_, or
_4th_ and _5th_ places. If they are made in the _2d_ and _3d_, then the
_extreams_ must be made when the _half-hunt_ lies behind; but if they
are made in the _4th_ and _5th_ places, then the _extreams_ must be made
when the _half-hunt_ lies next the _whole-hunt_, the _extreams_ being
always made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places.


                       London _Paradox. 1 and 2._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. The motion
of the treble is after this manner; in hunting up, first, it makes a
dodg in the _2d_ and _3d_ places, then it lies twice in the _4th_ place,
and four times behind; in which manner also it hunts down again, and
then leads four times. The rest of the bells have a like course and
motion with that of the treble, untill the treble leads. Now ’tis
observable, that every _single_ change is made in the _2d_ and _3d_
places until the treble leads, and then in the _3d_ and _4th_ places;
but when 2 lies next the treble, then an _extream_ behind. The changes
at the leadings of the_whole-hunt_ have an absolute dependency upon the
course of the _twenty four_ changes, _doubles_ and _singles_ upon four
bells; and the _extreams_ to be made as many ways as in that peal, which
are here guided by the motion of the _half-hunt_.

                           _12345_ │_Extre._
                            21435  │ 12453
                            24135  │ —————
                            21453  │ 14235
                            24153  │ 14325
                            42513  │ 13452
                            45213  │ 13542
                            42531  │ —————
                            45231  │ 15324
                            54321  │ 15234
                            53421  │ 12543
                            54312  │_Extre._
                            53412  │ 12534
                            35142  │ —————
                            31542  │ 15243
                            35124  │ 15423
                            31524  │ 14532
                            13254  │ 14352
                            13524  │ —————
                            15342  │ 13425
                            15432  │ 13245
                            —————  │ 12354
                            14523  │_Extre._
                            14253  │ 12345
                            12435  │


                           _Phœnix 5 and 4._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. Every bell
leads twice, and lies behind four times. Every _single_ is made in the
_2d_ and _3d_ places, until the _5th_ comes behind, and then in the _3d_
and _4th_ places; but when the _4th_ leads, (the _5th_ being behind) the
_single_ is in the _2d_ and _3d_ places.

                            _12345_│ 54123
                             21354 │ 51423
                             23154 │ 15432
                             32514 │ 14532
                             35214 │ 41352
                             53241 │ 43152
                             52341 │ 34125
                             25431 │ 34215
                             24531 │ 43125
                             42513 │ 41325
                             45213 │


                      London _pleasure. 1 and 2._

This peal in the former printing of it was prickt another way, but I
have here transposed that Course, which in my opinion renders it more
easie and practical.

                    _12345_│ 23154 │ 35142 │ 15432
                     21345 │ 21354 │ 35412 │ —————
                     23145 │ 12354 │ 35421 │ 14532
                     32145 │ 13254 │ 53421 │ 14523
                     31245 │ 13524 │ 53412 │ 14253
                     31425 │ 13542 │ 53142 │ 12453
                     34125 │ 31542 │ 51342 │ —————
                     34215 │ 31524 │ 15342 │ 12435
                     34251 │ 31254 │ 15324 │ 14235
                     32451 │ 32154 │ 15234 │ 14325
                     32415 │ 32514 │ 12534 │ 14352
                     23415 │ 32541 │ ————— │ —————
                     23451 │ 35241 │ 12543 │ 13452
                     23541 │ 35214 │ 15243 │ 13425
                     23514 │ 35124 │ 15423 │ 13245
                           │       │       │ 12345


      _Mr._ Tendring’_s_ _Peal, call’d_ Grand Paradox. _1 and 5._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. The motion
of the _whole-hunt_ is after this manner: first, it moves up into the
_2d_ and _3d_ places, lying twice in each; then it moves up and makes a
dodg behind, and then lieth still one change in the _5th_ place; then it
makes another dodg behind, and so moves down into the _3d_ and _2d_
places lying twice in each as before, and then leads four times. Every
other bell hath a like course and motion with that of the treble until
the leadings of the treble, and then observe, that every time the treble
goeth to lead and leaves leading, the _double_ change is made on the two
first and two last bells, except when it goeth to lead if the
_half-hunt_ lies next it, and then not. Every bell leads four times, and
every _single_ is made behind. The change wherein each bell leaves
leading, is always made on the four first bells, except as before.

            _12345_│ 45321 │ 21534 │ 43152 │ 13524 │ 14523
             21354 │ 45312 │ 25143 │ 43125 │ 13542 │ —————
             21345 │ 54132 │ 25134 │ 41352 │ ————— │ 13254
             23154 │ 54123 │ 52314 │ 41325 │ 12453 │ 13245
             23145 │ 51432 │ 52341 │ 14352 │ 12435 │ 12354
             32415 │ 51423 │ 53214 │ 14325 │ 14253 │ 12345
             32451 │ 15243 │ 53241 │ 13452 │ 14235 │ —————
             34215 │ 15234 │ 35421 │ 13425 │ ————— │
             34251 │ 12543 │ 35412 │ ————— │ 15432 │
             43521 │ 12534 │ 34521 │ 15324 │ 15423 │
             43512 │ 21543 │ 34512 │ 15342 │ 14532 │


                What you please, _Doubles and Singles._

Every bell leads four times, and lies behind twice, except when the
_extream_ is made behind; and twice in the second place, except when the
_extream_ is made before: and note, when the treble is before the fourth
stroke, the _single_ is in the _2d_ and _3d_, the next time the _single_
is behind; but at other times the _single_ is in the _3d_ and _4th_
places. When any bell leaves leading the _double_ change is on the two
first and two last, and the _extreams_ are made by turns, first behind,
then before, and so on to the end, for there are six _extreams_.

         _12345_ │ 34521  │ 21435  │ 45231  │ 14352  │ 14235
          21354  │ 34251  │ 21345  │ 54213  │ 14532  │ 14325
          21534  │ 43215  │ 23154  │ 54123  │ 15423  │ 13452
          25143  │ 43125  │ 23514  │ 51432  │_extre._│_extre._
          25413  │ 41352  │ 32541  │ 51342  │ 15432  │ 13425
          52431  │ 41532  │ 32451  │ 15324  │ —————  │ —————
          52341  │ 14523  │ 34215  │ 15234  │ 13254  │ 12534
          53214  │ 14253  │ 34125  │ 12543  │ 13524  │ 12354
          53124  │ 12435  │ 43152  │_extre._│ 15342  │ 13245
          35142  │_extre._│ 43512  │ 15243  │_extre._│_extre._
          35412  │ 12453  │ 45321  │ —————  │ 13542  │ 12345
                 │        │        │        │ —————  │


                             _Old Doubles.
                               1 and 2._

The changes are all _double_, except one _single_ every time the treble
leads. The treble hath a perfect hunting course as in plain changes, and
every other bell hath a like hunting course with that of the treble
until the treble leads, and then a _single_ is made in the _3d_ and
_4th_ places; but when the 2 lies next the treble, the _single_ is
behind which is call’d _extream_.

         _12345_ │ 13254  │ 51432  │ 12453  │ 15234  │ 14532
          21435  │ 13524  │ 15342  │ —————  │ —————  │ 14352
          24153  │ 31254  │ 15432  │ 14235  │ 12543  │ —————
          42513  │ 32145  │ —————  │ 14325  │_extre._│ 13425
          45231  │ 23415  │ 14523  │ —————  │ 12534  │ 13245
          54321  │ 24351  │ 14253  │ 13452  │ —————  │ —————
          53412  │ 42531  │ —————  │ 13542  │ 15243  │ 12354
          35142  │ 45213  │ 12435  │ —————  │ 15423  │_extre._
          31524  │ 54123  │_extre._│ 15324  │ —————  │ 12345


                             _New Doubles.
                               1 and 2._

The changes are all _double_, except one _single_ at every leading of
the treble. The treble hath a perfect hunting course as in plain
changes; and when it moves up from leading, the two first bells dodg
untill it comes down again and displaceth them. Every bell that comes
into the _3d_ place lies there twice, and then moves up behind; but the
bell which lies there when the treble leaves leading, moves down. Every
bell lies twice behind, except at the changes wherein the treble goeth
to lead and leaves leading. Every time the treble leads, a _single_
change is then made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places; but when the 2 lies
next the treble, an _extream_ behind.

         _12345_ │ 13254  │ 51324  │ 12453  │ —————  │ 14352
          21354  │ 13524  │ 15342  │ —————  │ 12543  │ —————
          23145  │ 31542  │ 15432  │ 14235  │_extre._│ 13425
          32415  │ 35124  │ —————  │ 14325  │ 12534  │ 13245
          23451  │ 53214  │ 14523  │ —————  │ —————  │ —————
          32541  │ 35241  │ 14253  │ 13452  │ 15243  │ 12354
          23514  │ 53421  │ —————  │ 13542  │ 15423  │_extre._
          32154  │ 35412  │ 12435  │ —————  │ —————  │ 12345
          31245  │ 53142  │_extre._│ 15324  │ 14532  │
                 │        │        │ 15234  │        │


                       _Reding Doubles. 1 and 2._

The treble hath a direct hunting course as in plain changes, and when it
moves up from leading the two first bells dodg until it comes down again
and displaceth them; and whilst they dodg before, every bell that comes
down into the _3d_ place lies there twice, and then moves up again
behind. But after the dodging all the bells go a direct hunting course
up and down, until the dodging again hindreth them as before. Every bell
lies twice behind, except when the treble leaves leading if the _2d_
lies next it, and then the _double_ is made on the two first and two
last bells; by which means the two hind-bells then make a dodg, which
happens in course once in twenty changes, that is, every second time the
treble leaves leading. By this method it will go sixty changes, and then
an _extream_ must be made. The _extreams_ in this peal may be made
according to the preceding general rule set down in the _Introduction_.
Here the first _extream_ is made at the end of sixty changes, the bells
lying 1 3 2; and when they come to lie so again, the second _extream_
must be made; the _extream_ is made behind, two of the _extream_ bells
lying there, and the _single_ is made in the _2d_ and _3d_ place at both
the _extreams_.

                       _12345_ │ 12534  │ 12354
                        21354  │ 21543  │ —————
                        23145  │ 25134  │ 13524
                        32415  │ 52314  │ 15342
                        23451  │ 25341  │ —————
                        32541  │ 52431  │ 14253
                        23514  │ 25413  │ 12435
                        32154  │ 52143  │ —————
                        31245  │ 51234  │ 14325
                        13425  │ 15324  │ 13452
                        14352  │ 13542  │ —————
                        41532  │ —————  │ 15234
                        45123  │ 14235  │ 12543
                        54213  │ 12453  │ —————
                        45231  │ —————  │ 15423
                        54321  │ 14523  │ 14532
                        45312  │ 15432  │ —————
                        54132  │ —————  │ 13245
                        51423  │ 13254  │_extre._
                        15243  │_extre._│ 12345


                         _Grandsire. 1 and 5._

The treble hath a direct hunting course as in plain changes, and every
other bell hath also a like hunting course with that of the treble
except when the _bobs_ hinder. The _bobs_ are double changes, and made
on the two first and two last bells according to this rule, _viz._ every
time the _treble_ goes to lead and leaves leading, a _bob_-change is
then made, except the _5th_ lying next it makes a change there with it,
and then not. Now ’tis observable, that once in twenty changes, that is,
at every second leading of the treble, the _5th_ lies next it, and
consequently there is but one _bob_-change then to be made, but at other
times two; so that at one leading of the treble there is but one
_bob_-change made, at the next leading there are two, and so
successively by turns, which for distinction may be call’d _single_ and
_double bobs_, The two bells that dodg behind at a _bob_ continue there
dodging until the treble comes up and displaceth them, and at every
_bob-change_ the bell in the _3d_ place lieth still, and then moves down
to lead. By this method it will go sixty changes; and to carry on the
course _extreams_ must be made, there being two in the peal. The manner
of making an _extream_ I have at large shewed in the _Introduction_, and
the _extreams_ may here be made in any place according to the general
rule there set down. The easiest way in practice is to make them at the
leadings of the treble; at any single _bob_ it maybe made behind, two of
the _extream_ bells lying there, and to lie still whilst the bells in
the _2d_ and _3d_ places do make the _single_ change: at any double
_bob_ it may be made in the _2d_ and _3d_ places, so that the _single_
must there be made behind. If the first _extream_ is made at the single
_bob_, the second must be made at the third following single _bob_; or
if the first is made at a double _bob_, the second must be made at the
third double _bob_ following, as in this peal here prickt, where the
first _extream_ is made at a double _bob_, and the second also made at
the third following double _bob_.

                       _12345_ │ 52143  │ 52431
                        21354  │ 51234  │ 25341
                        23145  │ 15324  │ 23514
                        32415  │ 13542  │ 32154
                        34251  │ 31524  │ 31245
                        43521  │ 35142  │ 13254
                        45312  │ 53412  │_extre._
                        54132  │ 54321  │ 13245
                        51423  │ 45231  │ —————
                        15243  │ 42513  │ 15342
                        12534  │ 24153  │ 13524
                        21543  │ 21435  │ —————
                        25134  │ 12453  │ 14253
                        52314  │ 14235  │ 12435
                        53241  │ 41253  │ —————
                        35421  │ 42135  │ 15234
                        34512  │ 24315  │ 12543
                        43152  │ 23451  │ —————
                        41325  │ 32541  │ 13452
                        14352  │ 35214  │ 14325
                        13425  │ 53124  │ —————
                        31452  │ 51342  │ 15423
                        34125  │ 15432  │ 14532
                        43215  │ 14523  │ —————
                        42351  │ 41532  │ 12354
                        24531  │ 45123  │_extre._
                        25413  │ 54213  │ 12345

This peal will go with any _hunts_, and to begin it on the four hind
bells; but then in ringing it at half-pulls, the first change being made
at back-stroke to prevent cutting compass, the bells at the end of the
peal will come round at a fore-stroke change. Therefore the better way
is to begin it on the four first bells, which may also be done with any
_hunts_, excepting 1.3, 1.5. and 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, wherein the first change
of each may be a _bob_. And observe, that in any way of beginning it,
the bells must all proceed in such a perfect hunting course as the first
change directs them, until the first _bob_ comes to be made.


                       _Old Triples and Doubles._

One change is _triple_, the next _double_, and so by turns, except one
_single_ at the end of every sixty changes. Every _triple_ change is
made on the two first, the two middle, and two last bells; and every
_double_ is made on the four middle bells, except when the _hunt_ leads
and then on the four hind bells. Treble is here the _hunt_, and hath a
direct hunting course up and down as in plain changes: the rest of the
bells have also a direct hunting course up and down except when the
treble leads, and then each bell that was hunting up (except that in the
_2d_ place) makes a dodge with the next bell below it, and then proceeds
forward again in its course up; and each bell which at the same time was
hunting down, makes a dodg with the next bell above it, and so
proceedeth forward in its course down; which method will carry on the
peal five _courses_ of the _hunt_, that is sixty changes as they are
here prickt.

In the 120 there is also a _half-hunt_; and when the _whole-hunt_ leads
and the _half-hunt_ lies next it, a single change must then be made,
either in the _3d_ and _4th_, or _5th_ and _6th_ places; but observing
when the _half-hunt_ comes again to lie next the _whole-hunt_, another
single change must be made in the same place where the first was made.
These single changes are called _extreams_, there being two in every
_sixscore_, and the last of them always falls out in course to be made
just 60 changes from the first, that is, at the fifth leading of the
whole _hunt_ after the first _extream_.

              _123456_│ 135264 │ 156342 │ 164523 │ 142635
               214365 │ 312546 │ 513624 │ 615432 │ 416253
               241635 │ 321456 │ 531264 │ 651342 │ 461523
               426153 │ 234165 │ 352146 │ 563124 │ 645132
               462513 │ 243615 │ 325416 │ 536214 │ 654312
               645231 │ 426351 │ 234561 │ 352641 │ 563421
               654321 │ 462531 │ 243651 │ 325461 │ 536241
               563412 │ 645213 │ 426315 │ 234516 │ 352614
               536142 │ 654123 │ 462135 │ 243156 │ 325164
               351624 │ 561432 │ 641253 │ 421365 │ 231546
               315264 │ 516342 │ 614523 │ 412635 │ 213456
               132546 │ 153624 │ 165432 │ 146253 │ 124365

In the 240 there is also a _half-hunt_; and when the _whole-hunt_ leads,
and the _half-hunt_ lies next it, a single change being then made in the
_4th_ and _5th_ places, will bring the bells round at _twelvescore_,
there being four _singles_ in the peal, one of which falls in the course
at the end of every sixty changes.

In the 720 there is a whole, half, and quarter _hunt_, and every time
the _whole-hunt_ leads and the _half-hunt_ lies next it, a single change
must then be made in the _4th_ and _5th_ places as in the _twelvescore_;
but when the _quarter-hunt_ lies next the _half-hunt_, that is, when the
three _hunts_ come together before, (which always happen at the end of
every _twelvescore_) then the _single_ must be made behind, which is
call’d _extream_, there being three of them in the peal.

The _sevenscore and four_ triples and doubles are the same with the
former except at the leadings of the treble, and then a _single_ is
always made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places; but when the 2 lies next the
treble, an _extream_ is made in the _4th_ and _5th_ places. This peal is
grounded on the _twenty four_ doubles and singles, the four middle bells
making them at the leadings of the treble.


                      _Grandsire Bob. 1, 2 and 4._

The general method of this peal is the same with that next before, but
with this difference; whereas in that peal _singles_ were made at the
end of every sixty changes to carry on the course, in this there are
_double_ changes made in their stead, which are called _Bob_-changes,
and made when the treble leads in the _2d_ and _3d_ and the _5th_ and
_6th_ places, whereas at other times the _double_ is there made on the
four hind bells.

The Practitioner may observe these rules in the ringing of it, _viz._
whatsoever bells he followeth when he hunteth up, he must follow the
same bells again, and in the same order, the next time he hunts down, as
in these changes here prickt; where the treble in hunting up first
follows 2, then 4, and then 6; and when it comes behind, first it
follows 2 again, then in its hunting down it follows 4 and 6 in the same
order as when it hunted up; which is also observed in the ringing of any
other bell, but with this difference betwixt the _whole-hunt_ and the
rest of the bells, _viz._ Every time the _whole-hunt_ leaves the
_treble’s_ place and hunts up, it followeth different bells from what it
did in its former hunting up, as may be seen in this example: where in
its first hunting up it first follows 2, then 4, then 6; whereas in the
next hunting up it first follows 3, then 2, then 4. But the first time
any other bell leads after a _bob_, whatsoever bells it then follows in
its hunting up, it follows the same bells likewise and in the same order
every time it hunts up, and consequently every time it hunts down unto
the next _bob_; as in this example, where 2 in its first hunting up,
first follows 4, then 6, then 5, and likewise when it next hunts up it
follows 465 as before, _&c._ But when the _whole-hunt_ is the second
bell which he follows in hunting up, he must follow it again when he
next lies behind.

                                _123456_
                                 214365
                                 241635
                                 426153
                                 462513
                                 645231
                                 654321
                                 563412
                                 536142
                                 351624
                                 315264
                                 132546
                                 135264
                                 312546
                                 321456
                                 234165
                                 243615
                                 426351
                                 462531
                                 645213

’Tis observable, that at every leading of the treble the two hind bells
dodg; and whensoever the _half-hunt_ dodgeth there, a _bob_ must then be
made, except the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and then not;
which is an infallible rule, by which he that rings the _half-hunt_ may
always give notice of the _bobs_ as well when the peal is inverted, as
in the ordinary way of ringing it. The _bobs_ fall out in course single
and double, the one single, the next double; and so by turns; there
being three single _bobs_ and three double _bobs_ in the
_eighteenscore_, and consequently six of each in the 720.

The aforesaid method being observed, will carry on the course of the
peal to the end of _eighteenscore_, which is just half the 720, and then
it terminates, as appears in the _eighteenscore_ here prickt: but by
making an _extream_ that number may be doubled; for then _eighteenscore_
changes more will go in course according to the former method; and
another _extream_ being likewise made at the end of the last
_eighteenscore_ will compleat the 720. The manner of making an _extream_
I have shewed at large in the _Introduction_, _page 90._ where I have
also set down a general rule for making them, to which I refer.

The first _extream_ may be made either the first, second, or third time
that the half and quarter _hunts_ dodg behind; or else at the first,
second, or third single _bob_; at either of which places the _single_
must be made behind.

               132546 │ 165432 │ 132465 │ 421536 │ 142563
              _123456_│ _bob._ │ 134256 │ 412356 │ ——————
               214365 │ 156423 │ 312465 │ 143265 │ 124653
               241635 │ 514632 │ 321645 │ 142356 │ 126435
               426153 │ 453126 │ 236154 │ _bob._ │ ——————
               462513 │ 435216 │ 263514 │ —————— │ 162345
               645231 │ 342561 │ 625341 │ 124536 │ 163254
               654321 │ 324651 │ 652431 │ 125463 │ ——————
               563412 │ 236415 │ 564213 │ —————— │ 136524
               536142 │ 263145 │ 546123 │ 152643 │ 135642
               351624 │ 621354 │ 451632 │ 156234 │ ——————
               315264 │ 612534 │ 415362 │ —————— │ 153462
               135264 │ 165243 │ 461235 │ 165324 │ _bob._
               312546 │ 162534 │ 143526 │ 163542 │ 135426
               321456 │ 615243 │ _bob._ │ —————— │ ——————
               234165 │ 651423 │ 134562 │ 136452 │ 153246
               243615 │ 564132 │ 315426 │ 163425 │ 152364
               426351 │ 546312 │ 351246 │ —————— │ ——————
               462531 │ 453621 │ 532164 │ 136245 │ 125634
               645213 │ 435261 │ 523614 │ 132654 │ 126543
               654123 │ 546321 │ 256341 │ —————— │ ——————
               561432 │ 342516 │ 265431 │ 123564 │ 162453
               516342 │ 324156 │ 624513 │ 125346 │ 164235
               153624 │ 231465 │ 642153 │ —————— │ ——————
               156342 │ 213645 │ 416325 │ 152436 │ 146325
               513624 │ 126354 │ 143652 │ 154263 │ _bob._
               531264 │ 123645 │ _bob._ │ —————— │ 164352
               352146 │ 216354 │ 134625 │ 145623 │ ——————
               541362 │ 261534 │ 316452 │ _bob._ │ 146532
               325416 │ 625143 │ 361542 │ 154632 │ _bob._
               234561 │ 652413 │ 635124 │ —————— │ 164523
               243651 │ 564231 │ 653214 │ 145362 │ ——————
               426315 │ 453612 │ 562341 │ _bob._ │ 146253
               462135 │ 435162 │ 526431 │ 154326 │ 142635
               641253 │ 341526 │ 254613 │ —————— │ ——————
               614523 │ 314256 │ 245163 │ 145236 │ 124365

Here are _eighteenscore_ changes wanting one, which one if it were made
double as the former, would bring the bells round, therefore an
_extream_ must be made as in this change 123465, the two hind bells
making the _extream_, and the bells in the _3d_ and _4th_ places making
the _single_. Now in regard that this _extream_ is made the second time
the _whole-hunt_ leads after a double _bob_, therefore the second
_extream_ must be made the second time the _whole-hunt_ leads after the
third double _bob_ following.

This peal may be rung with any _hunts_, and to begin the changes
_triple_ and _double_ as in this here prickt.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]




                      _Fifty three _LONDON_-Peals
                    upon Five, Six, Seven, and Eight
                        Bells, composed by_ F.S.


                               _Crambo._

The changes are all _single_; it hath a perfect course, and may be
prickt many ways.

         _12345_ │ 45312  │ 23514  │ 35142  │ 13254  │ 41325
          21345  │ 54312  │ 32514  │ 35124  │ 13245  │ 14325
          21435  │ 54132  │ 32154  │ 53124  │ 31245  │ 14352
          24135  │ 45132  │ 23154  │ 51324  │ 31425  │ 14532
          24153  │ 45123  │ 23145  │ 51342  │ 13425  │ 41532
          42153  │ 54123  │ 32145  │ 15342  │ 13452  │ 41523
          42135  │ 54213  │ 32415  │ 15432  │ 31452  │ 14523
          42315  │ 52413  │ 23415  │ 51432  │ 34152  │ 14253
          24315  │ 52431  │ 23451  │ 51423  │ 34125  │ 41253
          24351  │ 25431  │ 32451  │ 15423  │ 43125  │ 41235
          42351  │ 25413  │ 32541  │ 15243  │ 43215  │ 14235
          42531  │ 25143  │ 35241  │ 51243  │ 34215  │ 12435
          24531  │ 52143  │ 35214  │ 51234  │ 34251  │ 21453
          24513  │ 52134  │ 53214  │ 15234  │ 43251  │ 12453
          42513  │ 25134  │ 53241  │ 15324  │ 43521  │ 21543
          45213  │ 25314  │ 53421  │ 13524  │ 34521  │ 12543
          45231  │ 52314  │ 35421  │ 13542  │ 34512  │ 12534
          54231  │ 52341  │ 35412  │ 31542  │ 43512  │ 21534
          54321  │ 25341  │ 53412  │ 31524  │ 43152  │ 21354
          45321  │ 23541  │ 53142  │ 31254  │ 41352  │ 12354
                 │        │        │        │        │ 12345


                        _The Primrose. 1 and 2._

The treble hath a perfect course as in plain changes. And when it hunts
up out of the _2d_ place it makes two _singles_ together, and the like
when it hunteth down. When it leads, the _single_ is in the _3d_ and
_4th_ places, except when 2 lies next it, and then an _extream_ behind.
Every bell (except the treble) leads four times, and lies still behind
untill the treble displaceth it, except at the _extream_.

                       _12345_ │ 51432  │ 15234
                        21435  │ 15342  │ —————
                        24135  │ 15432  │ 12543
                        24315  │ —————  │_Extre._
                        23451  │ 14523  │ 12534
                        32541  │ 14253  │ —————
                        35214  │ —————  │ 15243
                        35124  │ 12435  │ 15423
                        31524  │_Extre._│ —————
                        13254  │ 12453  │ 14532
                        13524  │ —————  │ 14352
                        31254  │ 14235  │ —————
                        32154  │ 14325  │ 13425
                        32514  │ —————  │ 13245
                        35241  │ 13452  │ —————
                        53421  │ 13542  │ 12354
                        54312  │ —————  │_Extre._
                        54132  │ 15324  │ 12345


                               _Orpheus._

         _12345_ │ 14253  │ 34125  │ 54312  │ 32541  │ 52134
          13254  │ 41523  │ 43152  │ 53421  │ 23514  │ 51243
          13245  │ 41532  │ 43125  │ 53412  │ 23541  │ 51234
          31254  │ 45123  │ 34215  │ 35421  │ 25314  │ 15243
          31245  │ 45132  │ 34251  │ 35412  │ 25341  │ 15234
          32154  │ 54123  │ 32415  │ 53142  │ 52314  │ 12543
          32145  │ 54132  │ 32451  │ 53124  │ 52341  │ 12534
          23154  │ 51423  │ 23415  │ 51342  │ 25431  │ 21543
          23145  │ 51432  │ 23451  │ 51324  │ 25413  │ 21534
          21354  │ 15423  │ 24315  │ 15342  │ 24531  │ 12354
          21345  │ 15432  │ 24351  │ 15324  │ 24513  │ 12345
          12435  │ 14523  │ 42315  │ 13542  │ 42531  │
          12453  │ 14532  │ 42351  │ 13524  │ 42513  │
          21435  │ 41352  │ 43215  │ 31542  │ 45231  │
          21453  │ 41325  │ 43251  │ 31524  │ 45213  │
          24135  │ 14352  │ 34521  │ 35142  │ 54231  │
          24153  │ 14325  │ 34512  │ 35124  │ 54213  │
          42135  │ 13452  │ 43521  │ 53214  │ 52431  │
          42153  │ 13425  │ 43512  │ 53241  │ 52413  │
          41235  │ 31452  │ 45321  │ 35214  │ 25143  │
          41253  │ 31425  │ 45312  │ 35241  │ 25134  │
          14235  │ 34152  │ 54321  │ 32514  │ 52143  │

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns.


                  _New Doubles and Singles. 1 and 2._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. The treble
hath a direct hunting course up and down as in plain changes, and every
time it goeth to lead and leaves leading, the change is _double_ on the
two first and two last bells, the rest of the _double_ changes are on
the four first. The treble is one of the two bells that makes every
_single_ change except when it leads, and then the _single_ is made in
the _3d_ and _4th_ places; but when the 2 lies next the 1, then an
_extream_ is made behind. When the treble leaves the two first bells,
they continue slow dogding until treble comes down and displaceth them.
Every bell (except the treble) lieth twice in the _3d_ place.

                       _12345_ │ 51324  │ 15234
                        21354  │ 15342  │ —————
                        23154  │ 15432  │ 12543
                        32514  │ —————  │_Extre._
                        32541  │ 14523  │ 12534
                        23451  │ 14253  │ —————
                        23415  │ —————  │ 15243
                        32145  │ 12435  │ 15423
                        31245  │_Extre._│ —————
                        13254  │ 12453  │ 14532
                        13524  │ —————  │ 14352
                        31542  │ 14235  │ —————
                        35142  │ 14325  │ 13425
                        53412  │ —————  │ 13245
                        53421  │ 13452  │ —————
                        35241  │ 13542  │ 12354
                        35214  │ —————  │_Extre._
                        53124  │ 15324  │ 12345


                      _The Morning Star. 1 and 2._

The treble hath a direct hunting course as in plain changes; and every
time it hunts up, it makes two _singles_ together, and the like when it
hunts down: when it leads the _single_ is behind, but when 2 lies next
it an _extream_ is made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places. Every time the
treble goeth to lead and leaves leading, the double is on the two first
and two last bells, and every bell except the treble leads four times
together.

              _12345_ │ 51432  │ 14523  │ 15243  │ —————
               21354  │ 54132  │ 14532  │ —————  │ 14253
               23154  │ 54312  │ —————  │ 13425  │ 14235
               23514  │ 53421  │ 12354  │ 13452  │ —————
               25341  │ 35241  │_extre._│ —————  │ 15324
               52431  │ 32514  │ 12534  │ 12543  │ 15342
               54213  │ 32154  │ —————  │_extre._│ —————
               54123  │ 31254  │ 14352  │ 12453  │ 12435
               51423  │ 13245  │ 14325  │ —————  │_extre._
               15432  │ 13254  │ —————  │ 13542  │ 12345
               15423  │ —————  │ 15234  │ 13524  │


                       _The Quirister. 1 and 2._

This peal consists most of _double_ changes; the treble hath a direct
hunting course as in plain changes, and every time it hunts up and down
it makes a _single_ in the _3d_ and _4th_ places; and when it leads, the
_single_ is behind, but when 2 lies next it an _extream_ is made in the
_3d_ and _4th_ places.

                       _12345_ │ 32514  │ 15234
                        21354  │ 35241  │ 15243
                        23145  │ 53421  │ —————
                        23415  │ 54312  │ 14352
                        24351  │ 54132  │ 14325
                        42531  │ 51423  │ —————
                        45213  │ 15432  │ 12543
                        45123  │ 15423  │_extre._
                        41532  │ 51432  │ 12453
                        14523  │ 54123  │ —————
                        14532  │ 54213  │ 15324
                        41523  │ 52431  │ 15342
                        45132  │ 25341  │ —————
                        45312  │ 23514  │ 14253
                        43521  │ 23154  │ 14235
                        34251  │ 21345  │ —————
                        32415  │ 12354  │ 13542
                        32145  │_extre._│ 13524
                        31254  │ 12534  │ —————
                        13245  │ —————  │ 12435
                        13254  │ 13425  │_extre._
                        31245  │ 13452  │ 12345
                        32154  │ —————  │

When the treble leaves the two hind bells, they continue dodging untill
it comes up again and displaceth them, and then they hunt directly down;
the first to lead, and the other into the _2d_ place: that which moves
to lead, having lead four times, gives place to the treble; but when the
Treble hath done leading it takes the treble’s place again, and leads
four times more and then hunts directly up; the other bell which moved
down into the _2d_ place lies there twice, and then the Treble in
hunting down moves it into the _3d_ place where it lies still, untill
the Treble in hunting up moves it back into the _2d_ place, where having
lain twice it hunteth up. This Peal is as musical, easie, and practical
as any of this kind that ever was prickt.


                        _The Faulcon. 1 and 2._

This Peal consists most of _double_ changes. The treble hath a direct
hunting course as in plain changes, and every time it hunts up and down
it makes a _single_ in the _3d_ and _4th_ places, and when it leads a
_single_ is also made there, but when 2 lies next it the _extream_ is
made behind. When the treble leaves the two first bells they continue
there until it comes down again and displaceth them, but observe, when
the treble moves into the _5th_ place, and again from thence, the
_double_ is on the two first and two last bells, by means of which the
two first bells then dodg, but before and after they lie still. Every
bell lies twice in the _3d_ place and then hunts up, except that which
lies there when the treble leaves leading.

                  _12345_ │ 53241  │ —————  │ 15243
                   21354  │ 35421  │ 14235  │ 15423
                   23145  │ 53412  │ 14325  │ —————
                   23415  │ 53142  │ —————  │ 14532
                   32451  │ 51324  │ 13452  │ 14352
                   23541  │ 15342  │ 13542  │ —————
                   32514  │ 15432  │ —————  │ 13425
                   32154  │ —————  │ 15324  │ 13245
                   31245  │ 14523  │ 15234  │ —————
                   13254  │ 14253  │ —————  │ 12354
                   13524  │ —————  │ 12543  │_extre._
                   31542  │ 12435  │_extre._│ 12345
                   35124  │_extre._│ 12534  │
                   35214  │ 12453  │ —————  │


                            _Merry_ Andrew.
                               _1 and 2._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. The treble
leads four times, lies behind four times, and twice in every other
place. Every other bell leads four times. When the treble leaves the two
hind-bells, they continue dodging untill it comes up again and
displaceth them. Every _single_ is made behind until the treble hinders,
and then in the _2d_ and _3d_ places. When the treble leads and the _2d_
lies next it, then an _extream_ is made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places.

When the treble goes to lead and leaves leading, the _double_ is on the
two first and two last bells, and when every other bell goes to lead and
leaves leading, the _double_ in on the four first.

                  _12345_ │ 51423  │ 23514  │ 15243
                   21354  │ 15432  │ 32154  │ 15234
                   21345  │ 15423  │ 32145  │ 12543
                   23154  │ 14532  │ 31254  │_extre._
                   23145  │ 14523  │ 31245  │ 12453
                   32415  │ 41532  │ 13254  │ —————
                   34215  │ 41523  │ 13245  │ 13542
                   32451  │ 45132  │ 12354  │ 13524
                   34251  │ 45123  │_extre._│ 15342
                   43521  │ 54213  │ 12534  │ 15324
                   45321  │ 52413  │ —————  │ —————
                   43512  │ 54231  │ 14352  │ 14235
                   45312  │ 52431  │ 14325  │ 14253
                   54132  │ 25341  │ 13452  │ 12435
                   54123  │ 23541  │ 13425  │_extre._
                   51432  │ 25314  │ —————  │ 12345


                          _May-day. 1 and 5._

One change is _double_, the next _single_, and so by turns. When the
treble goes to lead and leaves leading, the _double_ is on the two first
and two last bells; and when every other bell goes to lead and leaves
leading, the _double_ is on the four first.

The treble hath a constant dodging course, for in its hunting up it
first makes a dodg in the second and third places, and then another
behind, and then it lies still one change in the _5th_ place; then in
its hunting down it makes another dodg behind, and also another in the
_2d_ and _3d_ places, and then leads four times. So that the treble in
one of the two bells that makes every _single_ until it leads, and then
’tis made in the _2d_ and _3d_ places, except when the _5th_ lies
behind, and then an _extream_ is made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places. When
the treble leaves the two hind-bells they continue slow dodging, until
it comes up again and displaceth them. Every bell leads four times.

                       _12345_ │ 45132  │ 12543
                        21354  │ 41523  │ 15234
                        23154  │ 45123  │ 12534
                        21345  │ 54213  │ —————
                        23145  │ 54231  │ 14352
                        32415  │ 52413  │ 13452
                        32451  │ 52431  │ 14325
                        34215  │ 25341  │_Extre._
                        34251  │ 25314  │ 14235
                        43521  │ 23541  │ —————
                        43512  │ 23514  │ 15324
                        45321  │ 32154  │ 13524
                        45312  │ 31254  │ 15342
                        54132  │ 32145  │ 13542
                        51432  │ 31245  │ —————
                        54123  │ 13254  │ 12453
                        51423  │ 12354  │ 14253
                        15432  │ 13245  │ 12435
                        14532  │_Extre._│_Extre._
                        15423  │ 13425  │ 12345
                        14523  │ —————  │
                        41532  │ 15243  │


                  _St._ Dunstan’s _Doubles. 1 and 2._

The changes are all _double_ except one _single_ every _2d_ time the
treble leads, there being six in the peal. The treble is a perfect
_hunt_; and every time it goeth to lead and leaves leading, the _double_
is made on the two first and two last bells, at which changes the bells
in the _3d_ place lie still and then move down, and the two hind-bells
at the same time dodg: but at other times all the bells have a direct
hunting course. When the treble leads, and the _2d_ lieth either in the
_2d_ or _3d_ places, then a _single_ must always be made betwixt the two
next _extream_ bells to the _2d_.

                      _12345_ │  13245  │  12453
                       21354  │  —————  │  —————
                       23145  │  15423  │  13542
                       32415  │  14532  │  15324
                       34251  │  —————  │  —————
                       43521  │  12354  │  14235
                       45312  │_extre._ │_single._
                       54132  │  12534  │  14253
                       51423  │  —————  │  —————
                       15432  │  14352  │  13524
                       14523  │  13425  │  15342
                       41532  │  —————  │  —————
                       45123  │  15243  │  12435
                       54213  │_single._│_Extre._
                       52431  │  15234  │  12345
                       25341  │  —————  │
                       23514  │  14325  │
                       32154  │  13452  │
                       31245  │  —————  │
                       13254  │  12543  │
                     _single._│_extre._ │


                       _Church Doubles. 1 and 2._

The changes are all _double_ except six _singles_ as the former. The
treble is a perfect _hunt_; and every time it moves up into the _5th_
place, and also out of it, the _double_ is then made on the two first
and two last bells, at which time the bells in the _3d_ place do lie
still and then move up; and the two first bells at the same time dodg.
When the treble leads, and the _2d_ lieth either in the _2d_ or _3d_
places, then a _single_ must always be made betwixt the two next
_extream_ bells to the _2d_.

                      _12345_ │  13254  │  14325
                       21435  │_single._│  —————
                       24153  │  13245  │  12543
                       42513  │  —————  │_Extre._
                       24531  │  14532  │  12453
                       42351  │  15423  │  —————
                       24315  │  —————  │  15324
                       42135  │  12354  │  13542
                       41253  │_Extre._ │  —————
                       14523  │  12534  │  14235
                       15432  │  —————  │_single._
                       51342  │  13425  │  14253
                       53124  │  14352  │  —————
                       35214  │  —————  │  15342
                       53241  │  15243  │  13524
                       35421  │_single._│  —————
                       53412  │  15234  │  12435
                       35142  │  —————  │_Extre._
                       31524  │  13452  │  12345

In this and the former peal the _singles_ may be made in another manner,
_viz._ when the _whole-hunt_ leads, and the _half-hunt_ lieth either in
the _4th_ or _5th_ places, a _single_ must then be made betwixt the two
next bells to the _half-hunt_; but at other times a _double_ change to
be made when the _whole-hunt_ leads, as in the former way.


                         Stedman’s _Principle_.

The changes are all _double_, two _singles_ excepted. One _double_ is
made on the two first and two last bells, the next on the four last, and
so by turns successively; excepting every sixth change, which is
_double_ on the four first bells, and for distinction is called a
_Parting_ change. All the bells have a like course. The general method
is this; the three first bells go the _six_ changes, and the two
hind-bells in the mean time dodg; then a _Parting_ change is made which
parts the two hind-bells, moving that in the fourth place down into the
_3d_, and that in the _3d_ place up into the _4th_, and then the three
first bells go the _six_ again, the two hind-bells in in the mean time
dodging as before; and then another _Parting_ change is made, and so
successively on. Every bell that comes behind continues there dodging
six changes with one bell and six with another, and then in course the
_Parting_ change brings it down. One _six_ cuts compass, the next doth
not, and so by turns successively. In the _six_ which cut compass the
two first bells of the three makes the first change of it, but in the
other the two last of the three. By this method the peal will go sixty
changes, and to carry it on farther _extreams_ must be made. An
_extream_ is made by the lying still of two bells when in course they
should make a change, as before I have shewed more fully in the
_Introduction_, _page 90._ but withall observing, that whereas in this
peal the bells have all a like course, therefore they may all be termed
_extream_ bells, and consequently the _extreams_ to be made according to
this general rule, _viz._ the first _extream_ may be made by any two
bells that are in course to make a change within the compass of the
first sixty changes of the peal; and the second _extream_ must be made
according to this rule. Whatsoever two bells are dodging behind at the
first _extream_, when the same two bells come to dodg there again, is a
certain warning for the second _extream_ to be then made. And observe,
how many changes the first _extream_ is made from a _parting_ change; so
many likewise must the last _extream_ be made after a _Parting_ change
also. And the _single_ and _extream_ comes in course each of them to be
made in the same place and by the same bells at the last _extream_, as
they were at the first. Here the _singles_ are made behind, and the
_extreams_ in the _2d_ and _3d_ places; and as the _4th_ and _5th_ bells
do dodg behind at the first _extream_, so likewise when they come to
dodg there again, the second _extream_ is then made, the treble leading
at both of them, as appeareth in the peal here prickt.

              _12345_ │ 42135  │ 52431  │ 24513  │ 51324
               21354  │ 41253  │ 25341  │ 42153  │ 15342
               23145  │ 14523  │ 52314  │ 24135  │ 13524
               32415  │ 41532  │ 53241  │ 21453  │ 31542
               23451  │ 45123  │ 35214  │ 12435  │ 35124
               24315  │ 54132  │ 32541  │ 14253  │ 53142
               42351  │ 51423  │ 23514  │ 41235  │ 35412
               43215  │ 15432  │ 32154  │ 14325  │ 34521
               34251  │ 51342  │ 31245  │ 13452  │ 43512
               43521  │ 53124  │ 13254  │ 31425  │ 45321
               45312  │ 35142  │_extre._│ 34152  │ 54312
               54321  │ 31524  │ 13245  │ 43125  │ 53421
               53412  │ 13542  │ 31254  │ 41352  │ 35241
               35421  │ 15324  │ 32145  │ 14532  │ 53214
               34512  │ 51234  │ 23415  │ 41523  │ 52341
               43152  │ 15243  │ 32451  │ 45132  │ 25314
               34125  │ 12534  │ 34215  │ 54123  │ 23541
               31452  │ 21543  │ 43251  │ 51432  │ 32514
               13425  │ 25134  │ 42315  │ 15423  │ 23154
               14352  │ 52143  │ 24351  │ 51243  │ 21345
               41325  │ 25413  │ 42531  │ 52134  │ 12354
               14235  │ 24531  │ 45213  │ 25143  │_extre._
               12453  │ 42513  │ 54231  │ 21534  │ 12345
               21435  │ 45231  │ 52413  │ 12543  │
               24153  │ 54213  │ 25431  │ 15234  │

The first _Parting_ change is here made the third change at the
beginning, and that _six_ cuts compass.

In all the several ways of ringing this peal, if the _Parting_ changes
are made at the fore-stroke, as in course they are in this here prickt,
then cutting compass is always on the same _sixes_, as in this peal: but
when the _Parting_ changes are made at back-stroke, then the contrary
_six_ always cuts compass to what doth here.


                        _Peals upon Six Bells._


                          _The single Method._

The changes are all _single_, and treble is the _hunt_. When the treble
moves up out of the _2d_ place, the two first bells continue slow
dodging untill the treble comes there again. And when the treble moves
down out of the fourth place, the two hind-bells likewise continue slow
dodging until the treble comes there again. When the treble leads, (if
’tis rung at half-pulls) the _fore-stroke change_ (that is, at the third
stroke of the treble’s leading) is made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places,
the rest of the changes there are made behind. By this method it will go
_sixscore_ changes.

                       _123456_│ 135264 │ 164253
                        213456 │ —————— │ 164235
                        213465 │ 153642 │ ——————
                        231465 │ 153624 │ 146352
                        231456 │ —————— │ 146325
                        321456 │ 135624 │ ——————
                        324156 │ 135642 │ 164325
                        234156 │ —————— │ 164352
                        234516 │ 153426 │ ——————
                        324516 │ 153462 │ 146523
                        324561 │ —————— │ 146532
                        234561 │ 135462 │ ——————
                        235461 │ 135426 │ 164532
                        325461 │ —————— │ 164523
                        325416 │ 153264 │ ——————
                        235416 │ 153246 │ 146235
                        235146 │ 152346 │ 146253
                        325146 │ 152364 │ 142653
                        321546 │ —————— │ 142635
                        312546 │ 125643 │ ——————
                        312564 │ 125634 │ 124356
                        132564 │ 126534 │ 124365
                        132546 │ 126543 │ 123465
                        135246 │ —————— │ 123456
                               │ 162435 │
                               │ 162453 │

To ring 240. When the _whole-hunt_ leads, and the _half-hunt_ dodgeth
behind; the _fore-stroke change_ must then be made in the _2d_ and _3d_
places, as in this here prickt, where the _2d_ is the _half-hunt_ and
there are little marks set at the _fore-stroke changes_.

To ring 360. When the _whole-hunt_ leads, and the _half_ and
_quarter-hunts_ dodg behind, the _fore-stroke_ change must then be made
in the _2d_ and _3d_ places as before.

To ring 720. When the _whole-hunt_ leads, and the _half-hunt_ dodgeth
behind, the _fore-stroke_ change must then be made in the _2d_ and _3d_
places as before, except the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with the
_half-hunt_, and then in the _3d_ and _4th_ places as at other times.
The _2d_ an _4th_, or the _2d_ and _6th_ may be the _half_ and
_quarter-hunts_, or others at pleasure.

“_Note_, in all the following peals upon six bells, the _bobs_ are
double changes, and always made at the leadings of the whole hunt
(except _No-nsuch Bob_, for there the Bobs are made at the change
wherein the whole-hunt goeth to lead, and not when it doth lead.) And
whereas in the following peals the directions for calling _bob_ runs
thus; _viz. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind, a Bob must then be
made, &c._ ’tis there implied, That whereas every time the whole-hunt
leads, the two hind-bells then dodg; therefore when the half-hunt
dodgeth there at the leading of the whole-hunt, a _bob_ must then be
made. And in like manner also must all the _bobs_ in the following peals
be made at the leading of the whole-hunt. He that rings the half-hunt
may best call _bob_ in all peals.”


                       _A Cure for Melancholly._

_Doubles and Singles._ The Treble is the _whole-hunt_ which leads four
times, lieth behind as many, and twice in every other place. When it
moves up out of the fourth place, the two bells in the third and fourth
places continue dodging until it comes down there again, and then the
two hind-bells dodg until the Treble displaceth them. The Treble is one
of the bells which maketh every _double_ change, except when it lieth
still behind, and then the _double_ is on the four first, and also when
it leads the _double_ is on the four last. Every _single_ is made in the
fifth and sixth places, except when the Treble lieth there, and then in
the third and fourth places. Every bell except the Treble lieth four
times in the second place. By this method it will go _sixscore_ changes,
but by making of _bobs_ it will go 240, 360, or 720. The _bob_ is a
_double_ change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the
fourth place lieth still.

                           _123456_│ 134625
                            213465 │ ——————
                            213456 │ 162345
                            231465 │ 162354
                            231456 │ 163245
                            234165 │ 163254
                            234156 │ ——————
                            243516 │ 125634
                            245316 │ 125643
                            243561 │ 126534
                            245361 │ 126543
                            423561 │ ——————
                            425361 │ 154263
                            423516 │ 154236
                            425316 │ 152463
                            452136 │ 152436
                            452163 │ ——————
                            451236 │ 143526
                            451263 │ 143562
                            415236 │ _bob_
                            415263 │ 134526
                            145236 │ 134562
                            145263 │ ——————
                            142536 │ 156423
                            142563 │ 156432
                            —————— │ _bob_
                            156423 │ 165423
                            156432 │ 165432
                            _bob_  │ ——————
                            165423 │ 132654
                            165432 │ 132645
                            —————— │ 136254
                            143652 │ 136245
                            143625 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 124365
                            134652 │ 124356
                                   │ 123465
                                   │ 123456
                                   │ ——————

To ring 240. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind, a _bob_ must
then be made as in this here prickt, where 2 is the _half-hunt_.

To ring 360. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ dodg together
behind, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 720. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must then
be made, except the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and then not.

2 may be the _half_ hunt, and 4 the _quarter_ hunt, or others at
pleasure.


                        _The Morning Exercise._

_Doubles and singles._ The treble is the _whole hunt_, and hunteth up
into the _2d_, _3d_ and _4th_ places, lying twice in each; then having
made a dodg behind, it lyeth still in the sixth place, and then makes
another dodg behind, and so hunts down in the same manner as it hunted
up, and then leads four times. When the Treble moves down out of the
fifth place, the two hind-bells dodge untill it comes up there again;
during which time the bell in the _4th_ place lieth still. And when the
Treble moves up out of the second place, each bell that comes there
lieth four times, until the Treble comes down there again. Every
_single_ is made behind. By this method it will go 120 changes; and by
making of _bobs_ it will go 240, 360, or 270. At the _bobs_ the bell in
the _2d_ place always lieth still.

                       _123456_│ —————— │ 142365
                        213465 │ 164352 │ 142356
                        213456 │ 164325 │ ——————
                        231465 │ _bob_  │ 146532
                        231456 │ 163452 │ 146523
                        234165 │ 163425 │ _bob_
                        234156 │ —————— │ 145632
                        243516 │ 165243 │ 145623
                        243561 │ 165234 │ ——————
                        245316 │ 156243 │ 143265
                        245361 │ 156234 │ 143256
                        254631 │ —————— │ 134265
                        254613 │ 154326 │ 134256
                        256431 │ 154362 │ ——————
                        256413 │ _bob_  │ 136524
                        265143 │ 153426 │ 136542
                        265134 │ 153462 │ _bob_
                        261543 │ —————— │ 135624
                        261534 │ 152643 │ 135642
                        216543 │ 152634 │ ——————
                        216534 │ 125643 │ 132465
                        126543 │ 125634 │ 132456
                        126534 │ —————— │ 123465
                        162543 │ 124365 │ 123456
                        162534 │ 124356 │

To ring 240. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind, a _bob_ must
then be made, as in this here prickt, where 2 is the _half-hunt_.

The warning for the _bobs_ in the 360 and 720, is the same with that in
the peal next before: 2 may be the _half-hunt_, and 4 the
_quarter-hunt_, or others at pleasure.


                          _The City Delight._

_Doubles and Singles_. Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and lieth four times
before, four times behind, and twice in every other place. When it moves
up out of the third place, the _singles_ are made in the second and
third places until it comes there again, and then behind until it moves
up again out of the third place. When it moves down out of the fourth
place, the two hind-bells dodg until it comes up there again, during
which time the bell in the fourth place lieth still. By this method it
will go 120, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 240, 360, or 720. At the
_bobs_ the bell in the second place always lieth still; and the warning
for them is the same with that in the two last peals. In the 240 here
prickt, 2 is the _half-hunt_; and in the 360 or 720, the 2 and 4 may be
the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_, or others at pleasure.

              _123456_│ 265143 │ 153462 │ 126534 │ 143256
               213465 │ 256143 │ —————— │ 126543 │ 134265
               213456 │ 251634 │ 156234 │ —————— │ 134256
               231465 │ 251643 │ 156243 │ 124365 │ ——————
               231456 │ 215634 │ 165234 │ 124356 │ 135642
               234165 │ 215643 │ 165243 │ 142365 │ 135624
               243165 │ 125634 │ —————— │ 142356 │ _bob_
               234165 │ 125643 │ 164352 │ —————— │ 136542
               243615 │ 152634 │ 164325 │ 145623 │ 136524
               246351 │ 152643 │ _bob_  │ 145632 │ ——————
               264351 │ —————— │ 163452 │ _bob_  │ 132465
               246531 │ 154326 │ 163425 │ 146523 │ 132456
               264531 │ 154362 │ —————— │ 146532 │ 123465
               265413 │ _bob_  │ 162534 │ —————— │ 123456
               256413 │ 153426 │ 162543 │ 143265 │


                         London _Nightingale_.

_Doubles and Singles._ Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and lieth four times
before, four times behind and twice in every other place. When it moves
down out of the _5th_ place, the two hind-bells continue dodging until
it comes there again, during which time the bell in the fourth place
lieth still. And when the two hind-bells leave dodging then the two
first bells dodg until the hind-bells dodg again, and then they cease.
By this method it will go 120; and by making of _bobs_ it will go 240,
360, or 720. At the _bobs_ the bell in the second place always lyeth
still; and the warning for them is the same with that in the preceding
peals. In the 240 here prickt, 2 is the _half-hunt_; and in the 360 or
720, the 2 and 4 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ or others at
pleasure.

                       _123456_│ —————— │ 163245
                        213465 │ 126543 │ 163254
                        213456 │ 126534 │ ——————
                        231465 │ 162543 │ 125634
                        231456 │ 162534 │ 125643
                        234165 │ —————— │ 152634
                        234156 │ 153624 │ 152643
                        243516 │ 153642 │ ——————
                        423516 │ _bob_  │ 164523
                        243561 │ 156324 │ 164532
                        423561 │ 156342 │ _bob_
                        245361 │ —————— │ 165423
                        425361 │ 134562 │ 165432
                        245316 │ 134526 │ ——————
                        425316 │ _bob_  │ 143652
                        452136 │ 135462 │ 143625
                        452163 │ 135426 │ _bob_
                        451236 │ —————— │ 146352
                        451263 │ 142356 │ 146325
                        415236 │ 142365 │ ——————
                        415263 │ 124356 │ 132465
                        145236 │ 124365 │ 132456
                        145263 │ —————— │ 123465
                        154236 │ 136245 │ 123456
                        154263 │ 136254 │


                         _The Evening Delight._

_Doubles and Singles._ Treble is the _whole-hunt_ and leads four times,
lies behind four times, and twice in every other place, except in the
_2d_ and _3d_ places where it makes a dodg every time it hunts up and
down. Every other bell hath the same course with the _whole-hunt_; but
observing, when they come down and have made a _dodg_ in the second and
third places, they lie still one change in the second place, and then
make another _dodg_ there, and so hunt up as the Treble did. But note,
when the Treble goeth to lead and leaves leading, the bells in the third
and fourth places lie still. Every _single_ is made in the second and
third places, and every bell lieth four times behind. By this method it
will go 120, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 240, 360, or 720. At the
_bob_-change, the bell in the _4th_ place always lieth still.

                       _123456_│ —————— │ 153642
                        213465 │ 146253 │ 135642
                        231465 │ 164253 │ ——————
                        213645 │ _bob_  │ 136524
                        231645 │ 146235 │ 163524
                        236154 │ 164235 │ _bob_
                        263154 │ —————— │ 136524
                        236514 │ 162453 │ 163542
                        263514 │ 126453 │ ——————
                        265341 │ _bob_  │ 165324
                        256341 │ 162435 │ 156324
                        265431 │ 126435 │ _bob_
                        256431 │ —————— │ 165342
                        254613 │ 124653 │ 156342
                        245613 │ 142653 │ ——————
                        254163 │ 124563 │ 153624
                        245163 │ 142563 │ 135624
                        241536 │ —————— │ 153264
                        214536 │ 145236 │ 135264
                        241356 │ 154236 │ ——————
                        214356 │ 145326 │ 132546
                        124365 │ 154326 │ 123546
                        142365 │ —————— │ 132456
                        124635 │ 153462 │ 123456
                        142635 │ 135462 │

To ring 240. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth in the second and third
places a _bob_ must then be made, as in this here prickt, where 6 is the
_half-hunt_.

To ring 360. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ dodg together in
the second and third places, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 720. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth in the _2d_ and _3d_
places a _bob_ must then be made, except when the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth
there with it, and then not.

In the 360 or 720, the 6 and 5 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_, or
else 2 and 4, or others at pleasure.


                          _Colledge Doubles._

Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and hath a direct hunting course. When it
moves down out of the _5th_ place, the two hind-bells dodg until it
comes there again; during which time the bell in the fourth place lieth
still: but otherwise the five hind-bells have a direct hunting course.
By this method it will go _sixty_ changes; and by making of _bobs_ it
will go 120, 180, 360. At the _bob_-changes the bell in the second place
always lieth still.

                           _123456_│ 156234
                            213465 │ 165243
                            231456 │ ——————
                            234165 │ 164352
                            243615 │ _bob_
                            246351 │ 163425
                            264531 │ ——————
                            265413 │ 162534
                            256143 │ 126543
                            251634 │ ——————
                            215643 │ 124365
                            125634 │ 142356
                            152643 │ ——————
                            512634 │ 145623
                            521643 │ _bob_
                            526134 │ 146532
                            562314 │ ——————
                            563241 │ 143265
                            536421 │ 134256
                            534612 │ ——————
                            543162 │ 135642
                            541326 │ _bob_
                            514362 │ 136524
                            154326 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 132465
                            153462 │ 123456
                            —————— │

To ring 120. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind, a _bob_ must
then be made; as in this here prickt, where 2 is the _half-hunt_.

To ring 180. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunt_ dodg together
behind, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 360. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must then
be made, except when the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and then
not.

In the 180 or 360, 2 and 4 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_, or
others at pleasure.

By making of two _extreams_ the 360 may be doubled. They are to be made
according to the rules in the _Introduction, page 90_.


                            _Non-such Bob._

_Doubles._ Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and hath a direct hunting course.
When it moves up out of the third place, the bell that comes there lieth
still until the Treble comes down there again; during which time the two
first bells dodg. When the Treble leaves the two hind-bells, they dodg
until the change wherein the Treble goeth to lead, and then one of them
moves down; but as soon as that change is made, the two hind-bells dodg
again until the Treble moves up and parts them. Every time the Treble
leads, the _double_ is made on the four hind-bells throughout the peal.
By this method it will go _sixty_ changes; and by making of _bobs_ it
will go 120, 180, or 360. The _bob_ is always made at the change wherein
the Treble goeth to lead, the two first and two last bells making it.

                  _123456_│ 532641 │ 165324 │ 543162
                   213465 │ 352614 │ 163542 │ 453612
                   231456 │ 532164 │ 613524 │ 543621
                   234165 │ 531246 │ 631542 │ 453261
                   324615 │ 513264 │ 635124 │ 543216
                   234651 │ 153624 │ 365214 │ 453126
                   324561 │ 156342 │ 635241 │ 451362
                   234516 │ 516324 │ 365421 │ 415326
                   324156 │ 561342 │ 635412 │ 145236
                   321465 │ 563124 │ 365142 │ 142563
                   312456 │ 653214 │ 361524 │ 412536
                   132546 │ 563241 │ 316542 │ 421563
                   135264 │ 653421 │ _bob_  │ 425136
                   315246 │ 563412 │ 136524 │ 245316
                   351264 │ 653142 │ 135642 │ 425361
                   352146 │ 651324 │ 315624 │ 245631
                   532416 │ 615342 │ 351642 │ 425613
                   352461 │ _bob_  │ 356124 │ 245163
                          │        │ 536214 │ 241536
                          │        │ 356241 │ 214563
                          │        │ 536421 │ 124653
                          │        │ 356412 │ 126435
                          │        │ 536142 │ 216453
                          │        │ 531624 │ 261435
                          │        │ 513642 │ 264153
                          │        │ 153462 │ 624513
                          │        │ 154326 │ 264531
                          │        │ 514362 │ 624351
                          │        │ 541326 │ 264315
                          │        │        │ 624135
                          │        │        │ 621453
                          │        │        │ 612435
                          │        │        │ _bob_
                          │        │        │ 162453
                          │        │        │ 164235
                          │        │        │ 614253
                          │        │        │ 641235
                          │        │        │ 642153
                          │        │        │ 462513
                          │        │        │ _&c._

To ring 120. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth before, is a warning for
a _bob_ to be made the next time the _whole-hunt_ goeth to lead; as in
this here prickt, where 6 is the _half-hunt_.

To ring 180. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ dodg together
before, is a warning for a _bob_ to be made when next the Treble goeth
to lead.

To ring 360. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth before, is a warning for
a _bob_ to be made the next time the Treble goeth to lead, except the
_quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and then not.

In the 180 and 360, the 6 may be the _half-hunt_ and 5 the
_quarter-hunt_, or others at pleasure.

By making of two _extreams_ the 360 may be doubled; they must be made
according to the rule in the _Introduction_, _page 90._

The _bobs_ in this peal may also be made at the leadings of the
_whole-hunt_ as in other peals, and the bell in the fourth place to lie
still at every _bob-change_. The warning for them in the 120, 180, and
360 being the same with that in the _Colledge Doubles_, _page 143._


                           London _Doubles._

The Treble is the _whole-hunt_; and hath a direct hunting course. When
it moves down out of the fifth place the two hind-bells dodg until it
comes there again, during which time the bell in the fourth place lieth
still. When the Treble is behind, the two first bells make a change; but
at other times the leading bell lieth still. By this method it will go
_sixty_ changes, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 120, 180, or 360. At
the _bob-changes_ the bell in the second place always lieth still. The
warning for the _bobs_ in the 120, 180, and 360, is the same with that
in _Colledge Doubles_, _p. 143._ By making of two _extreams_ it will go
720. The _extreams_ must be made according to the rule in the
_Introduction_, _page 90._

In the 120 here prickt, 2 is the _half-hunt_; and in the 180 and 360, 2
and 4 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_, or others at pleasure.

                  _123456_│ 541263 │ 156342 │ ——————
                   213465 │ 542136 │ —————— │ 164523
                   231456 │ 524316 │ 134562 │ _bob_
                   234165 │ 523461 │ _bob_  │ 165432
                   243615 │ 253641 │ 135426 │ ——————
                   246351 │ 256314 │ —————— │ 143652
                   426531 │ 265134 │ 142356 │ _bob_
                   425613 │ 261543 │ 124365 │ 146325
                   452163 │ 216534 │ —————— │ ——————
                   451236 │ 126543 │ 136245 │ 132465
                   415263 │ 162534 │ 163254 │ 123456
                   145236 │ —————— │ —————— │
                   154263 │ 153624 │ 125634 │
                   514236 │ _bob_  │ 152643 │


                    _Triples, Doubles, and Singles._

                           _123456_│ 153462
                            214365 │ _bob_
                            241635 │ 135426
                            246135 │ ——————
                            264315 │ 153246
                            623451 │ 152364
                            632541 │ ——————
                            365214 │ 125634
                            356124 │ 126543
                            351624 │ ——————
                            315264 │ 162453
                            132546 │ 164235
                            135264 │ ——————
                            312546 │ 146325
                            321456 │ _bob_
                            324156 │ 164352
                            342516 │ ——————
                            435261 │ 146532
                            453621 │ _bob_
                            546312 │ 164523
                            564132 │ ——————
                            561432 │ 146253
                            516342 │ 142635
                            153624 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 124365
                            135642 │ 123456
                            —————— │


            _Triples, Doubles, and Singles dodging behind._

                           _123456_│ 162345
                            214365 │ 126354
                            241356 │ ——————
                            243156 │ 156423
                            234516 │ _bob_
                            325461 │ 154632
                            352641 │ ——————
                            536214 │ 134256
                            563124 │ 143265
                            561324 │ ——————
                            516342 │ 163542
                            153624 │ 136524
                            135642 │ ——————
                            316524 │ 126435
                            361542 │ _bob_
                            365142 │ 124653
                            356412 │ ——————
                            534621 │ 154326
                            543261 │ 145362
                            452316 │ ——————
                            425136 │ 165243
                            421536 │ _bob_
                            412563 │ 162534
                            145236 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 132465
                            142563 │ 123456
                            —————— │


                        _Doubles, and Triples._

                           _123456_│ 152364
                            214365 │ 125346
                            241356 │ ——————
                            243165 │ 165432
                            234615 │ _bob_
                            326451 │ 164523
                            362541 │ ——————
                            635214 │ 134256
                            653124 │ 143265
                            651342 │ ——————
                            615324 │ 153624
                            163542 │ 135642
                            136524 │ ——————
                            315642 │ 125463
                            351624 │ _bob_
                            356142 │ 124536
                            365412 │ ——————
                            634521 │ 164352
                            643251 │ 146325
                            462315 │ ——————
                            426135 │ 156234
                            421653 │ _bob_
                            412635 │ 152643
                            146253 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 132465
                            142635 │ 123456
                            —————— │


                             _Single Bob._

                           _123456_│ 134562
                            214365 │ 135426
                            241635 │ ——————
                            426153 │ 125634
                            462513 │ _bob_
                            645231 │ 152643
                            462531 │ ——————
                            645213 │ 142356
                            654123 │ 143265
                            561432 │ ——————
                            516342 │ 163542
                            153624 │ 165324
                            156342 │ ——————
                            513624 │ 125463
                            531264 │ _bob_
                            352146 │ 152436
                            325416 │ ——————
                            234561 │ 132654
                            325461 │ 136245
                            234516 │ ——————
                            243156 │ 146532
                            421365 │ _bob_
                            412635 │ 164523
                            146253 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 124365
                            164235 │ 123456
                            —————— │


                             London _Bob_.

                           _123456_│ ——————
                            214365 │ 162534
                            241356 │ 126543
                            423165 │ ——————
                            432615 │ 145623
                            346251 │ _bob_
                            436521 │ 146532
                            345612 │ ——————
                            354162 │ 135642
                            531426 │ _bob_
                            513462 │ 136524
                            154326 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 125634
                            153462 │ 152643
                            —————— │ ——————
                            164352 │ 146253
                            _bob_  │ 164235
                            163425 │ ——————
                            —————— │ 132465
                            124365 │ 123456
                            142356 │
                            —————— │
                            153246 │
                            135264 │


                              _City Bob._

                           _123456_│ 163425
                            214365 │ _bob_
                            241635 │ 136452
                            426153 │ ——————
                            462513 │ 163254
                            645231 │ 162345
                            465321 │ ——————
                            643512 │ 126543
                            634152 │ 125634
                            361425 │ ——————
                            316245 │ 152436
                            132654 │ 154263
                            136245 │ ——————
                            312654 │ 145362
                            321564 │ _bob_
                            235146 │ 154326
                            253416 │ ——————
                            524361 │ 145623
                            254631 │ _bob_
                            526413 │ 154632
                            562143 │ ——————
                            651234 │ 145236
                            615324 │ 142563
                            163542 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 124365
                            136524 │ 123456
                            —————— │

These six peals will each of them go _sixty_ changes without any _bob_,
and by making of _bobs_ each of them will go 120, 180, and 360. In three
of them, _viz._ _Triples Doubles_ and _Singles_, _Single bob_, and _City
bob_, at the _bob-changes_ the bell in the fourth place always lyeth
still; whereas at the rest of the changes which are made at the leadings
of the _whole-hunt_, the bell in the second place lieth still. And in
the other three peals, _viz._ _Triples doubles and singles dodging
behind_, _Doubles and Triples_, and _London Bob_, at the _bob-changes_
the bell in the second place always lieth still, whereas at the rest of
the changes that are made at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_, the bell
in the fourth place lieth still. The warning for the _bobs_ in the 120,
180, and 360, in each of these _six_ peals is the same with that in the
120, 180, and 360 in _Colledge Doubles_, _p. 143._ Each of these peals
will go 720 with two _extreams_, which must be made according to the
rule in the _Introduction_, _page 90._

In the 120 of each there prickt, _viz._, in _City Bob_, _London Bob_,
and _Triples doubles_ and _singles_, the 2 is the _half-hunt_, and in
the other three peals the 3 is the _half-hunt_.

In the 180 and 360 of each peal, the 2 and 4 may be the _half_ and
_quarter-hunts_, or others at pleasure.


                               _New Bob._

_Triples and Doubles._ The general method of this Peal is the same with
_Grandsire Bob_, and the _bobs_ also made as in that peal. It will go
120, 180, or 240, and by making of two _extreams_ it will go 360 or 480;
and with six _singles_ it will go 720.

To ring 120. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must then
be made.

To ring 180. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunt_ dodg together
behind, a _bob_ must then be made; and by making of two _extreams_ it
will go 360. The first _extream_ may be made at the first, second, or
third _bob_; observing to make the second _extream_ at the third
following _bob_ from the first _extream_, where the _singles_ in both
must be made behind.

To ring 720. The _bobs_ throughout the peal are made by the same rule as
in the 120, but farther observing, when the _whole_ and _half-hunts_
come together before, if the _quarter-hunt_ lieth either in the third or
fourth places, then a _single_ must be made betwixt the two next
_extream_ bells to the _quarter-hunt_.

The 2 may be the _half-hunt_ and 4 the _quarter-hunt_, or others at
pleasure.


                 _Colledge Little Bob, dodging behind._

_Triples and Doubles._ The Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and hath a direct
hunting course. When it moves down out of the fifth place, the two
hind-bells dodg until it comes there again. All the bells have a direct
hunting course, but observing, that when any bell moves up into the
fourth place, if the Treble is then any where below it, it lies there
twice, and then moves down again. By this method it will go _sixty_
changes; and by making of _bobs_ it will go 120, 180, or 360. At every
_bob-change_ the bell in the second place lieth still. The warning for
the _bobs_ is the same with that in _Colledge Doubles_, _page 143._ And
the two _extreams_ in the 720 must be made according to the rule in the
_Introduction_, _page 90_.

                           _123456_│ 162345
                            214365 │ 126354
                            241356 │ ——————
                            423165 │ 156423
                            432615 │ _bob_
                            346251 │ 154632
                            364521 │ ——————
                            635412 │ 134256
                            653142 │ 143265
                            561324 │ ——————
                            516342 │ 163542
                            153624 │ 136524
                            135642 │ ——————
                            316524 │ 126435
                            361542 │ _bob_
                            635124 │ 124653
                            653214 │ ——————
                            562341 │ 154326
                            526431 │ 145362
                            254613 │ ——————
                            245163 │ 165243
                            421536 │ _bob_
                            412563 │ 162534
                            145236 │ ——————
                            _bob_  │ 132465
                            142563 │ 123456
                            —————— │

In the 120 here prickt, 3 is the _half-hunt_; and in the 180 or 360, 2
and 4 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_, or others at pleasure.

_This peal in practice will be found very plain and easie, and also good
Musick._


           _Colledge Little Bob, dodging before and behind._

_Triples and Doubles._ The Treble hath a direct hunting course, and when
it moves up out of the second place, the two first bells dodg until it
comes there again; and also when it moves down out of the _5th_ place,
the two hind-bells dodg until it comes there again. Every bell that
moves up into the fourth place, if the Treble is any where below it,
lies there twice and then hunts down; and also every bell that moves
down into the third place, if the Treble is any where above it, lieth
there twice, and then hunts up behind. By this method it will go _sixty_
changes, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 120, 180, or 360. At every
_bob-change_ the bell in the second place lieth still. The 2 is the
_half-hunt_ in the 120 here prickt, and 2 and 4 may be the _half_ and
_quarter-hunts_ in the 120 and 360, or others at pleasure.

                           _123456_│ _bob_
                            214365 │ 156342
                            241356 │ ——————
                            423165 │ 134562
                            243615 │ _bob_
                            426351 │ 135426
                            246531 │ ——————
                            425613 │ 142356
                            245163 │ 124365
                            421536 │ ——————
                            412563 │ 136245
                            145236 │ 163254
                            154263 │ ——————
                            512436 │ 125634
                            521463 │ 152643
                            254136 │ ——————
                            524316 │ 164523
                            253461 │ _bob_
                            523641 │ 165432
                            256314 │ ——————
                            526134 │ 143652
                            251643 │ _bob_
                            215634 │ 146325
                            126543 │ ——————
                            162534 │ 132465
                            —————— │ 123456
                            153624 │

The warning for the _bobs_ is the same with that in the _Colledge
Doubles_, _p. 143_. And the two _extreams_ in the 720 must be made
according to the general rule in the _Introduction_, _page 90_.


                              _Court Bob._

_Triples_ and _Doubles._ The Treble hath a direct hunting course. Every
bell that comes before and behind makes a _Dodg_, then lieth still, and
so moves away, except the bell that lieth still behind when the treble
leads, and also that bell which leads when the Treble lieth behind, both
which do dodg before and after their lying still, and then move away.
When the treble leads and lieth behind, the _double_ is made on the four
middle bells. By this method it will go _sixty_ changes; and with _bobs_
it will go 120, 180, or 360. At the _bob-changes_ the bell in the fourth
place lieth still.

                           _123456_│ 165324
                            214365 │ 156234
                            241356 │ ——————
                            423165 │ 143265
                            243615 │ 134625
                            426351 │ ——————
                            462531 │ 152643
                            645213 │ _bob_
                            465123 │ 125634
                            641532 │ ——————
                            614523 │ 143652
                            165432 │ 134562
                            156342 │ ——————
                            513624 │ 126543
                            531642 │ _bob_
                            356124 │ 162534
                            536214 │ ——————
                            352641 │ 143526
                            325461 │ 134256
                            234516 │ ——————
                            324156 │ 165243
                            231465 │ 156423
                            213456 │ ——————
                            124365 │ 132465
                            _bob_  │ _bob_
                            142356 │ 123456
                            —————— │

To ring 120. Every time the _half-hunt_ maketh a change next the
_whole-hunt_, a _bob_ must then be made, as in this here prickt, where 2
is the _half-hunt_.

To ring 180. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ make a change
together next the _whole-hunt_, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 360. Every time the _half-hunt_ maketh a change next the
_whole-hunt_ a _bob_ must then be made, except when a _quarter-hunt_
makes a change there with it, and then not.

In the 180 and 360 2 and 4 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ or
others at pleasure. The two _extreams_ in the 720 must be made according
to the rule in the _Introduction_. The first _extream_ may be made
either first, second, or third time that the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_
make a change together in the second and third places at the leading of
the _whole-hunt_; and then the second _extream_ must be made the third
time following that those two bells make a change there again, the
_extreams_ being there made in the fourth and fifth places, and the
_singles_ in the second and third places.

Every time the Treble leads, the _double_ may as well be made on the
four hind-bells, and the _bobs_ to be made as before; but the warning
for them the same with _Colledge Doubles_.


                         _Five Colledge Bobs._

In these five peals, the Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and hath a like
dodging course in all of them. The general method of the five peals is
as follows: _viz._

_Colledge Bob the first._ When the Treble moves down out of the fifth
place, the two hind bells dodg until it comes there again. Every bell
leads twice, and then hunts up into the fourth place, unless the dodging
course of the Treble hinders it, where it lieth twice and then moves
down again; except the bell that dodged with the Treble before, and also
that which leads when the Treble lieth still behind, both which hunt
directly up. When the Treble moves down from dodging in the third and
fourth places, the bell that dodged there with it continues in those two
places, lying twice together in each by turns until the Treble comes to
dodg there with it again.

_Colledge Bob the second._ Every bell when it comes to lead makes a dodg
before, then it lyeth still one change, then it makes another dodg, and
so moves up into the fourth place where it lieth still twice, and then
down again; except it dodgeth with the Treble in the fourth place, and
then it hunts up behind. But when the Treble moves down out of the third
place, the two bells in the third and fourth places continue there until
the Treble comes up there again, during which time the two hind-bells
dodg.

_Colledge Bob the third._ When the Treble leaves leading, the two first
bells dodg until it comes to lead again; except when the Treble dodgeth
behind, for then the two first bells lie still. When the Treble leaves
the two hind-bells, they lie still one change, dodg the next, and so by
turns until the treble comes there again. The two middle bells always
dodg until the Treble hindereth them.


                       _Colledge Bob the First._

                           _123456_│ 435216
                            214365 │ _&c._
                            124356 │ 163542
                            213465 │ _bob._
                            231456 │ 165324
                            324165 │ ——————
                            321456 │ 123564
                            234165 │ _bob._
                            243615 │ 125346
                            426351 │ ——————
                            462315 │ 143526
                            643251 │ 134562
                            634521 │ ——————
                            365412 │ 165432
                            356421 │ 156423
                            534612 │ ——————
                            543162 │ 124653
                            451326 │ 142635
                            453162 │ ——————
                            541326 │ 136245
                            514362 │ _bob._
                            153426 │ 132654
                            513462 │ ——————
                            154326 │ 156234
                            145362 │ _bob._
                            413526 │ 152643
                            143562 │ ——————
                            415326 │ 146253
                            451362 │ 164235
                            543126 │ ——————
                            541362 │ 132465
                            453126 │ 123456


                       _Colledge Bob the Second._

                           _123456_│ 543216
                            214365 │ _&c._
                            124356 │ 153624
                            213465 │ _bob_
                            231645 │ 135642
                            326154 │ ——————
                            231654 │ 153462
                            326145 │ _bob_
                            362415 │ 135426
                            634251 │ ——————
                            364215 │ 153246
                            632451 │ 152364
                            623541 │ ——————
                            265314 │ 125634
                            625341 │ 126543
                            263514 │ ——————
                            236154 │ 162453
                            321645 │ 164235
                            236145 │ ——————
                            321654 │ 146325
                            312564 │ _bob_
                            135246 │ 164352
                            315264 │ ——————
                            132546 │ 146532
                            135264 │ _bob_
                            312546 │ 164523
                            132564 │ ——————
                            315246 │ 146253
                            351426 │ 142635
                            534162 │ ——————
                            351462 │ 124365
                            534126 │ 123456


                       _Colledge Bob the Third._

                           _123456_│ 462513
                            214365 │ _&c._
                            123465 │ 165432
                            214356 │ _bob_
                            241365 │ 156423
                            423156 │ ——————
                            241356 │ 143526
                            423165 │ _bob_
                            243615 │ 134562
                            426351 │ ——————
                            423615 │ 152364
                            246351 │ 153246
                            423651 │ ——————
                            246315 │ 126543
                            243651 │ 125634
                            426315 │ ——————
                            246135 │ 164235
                            421653 │ 162453
                            246153 │ ——————
                            421635 │ 143652
                            412653 │ _bob_
                            146235 │ 134625
                            412635 │ ——————
                            146253 │ 165324
                            142635 │ _bob_
                            416253 │ 156342
                            142653 │ ——————
                            416235 │ 132546
                            461253 │ 135264
                            642135 │ ——————
                            461235 │ 124365
                            642153 │ 123456


                       _Colledge Bob the Fourth._

                           _123456_│ 462513
                            214365 │ _&c._
                            124356 │ 165432
                            213465 │ _bob_
                            231456 │ 156423
                            324165 │ ——————
                            321456 │ 143526
                            234165 │ _bob_
                            243615 │ 134562
                            426351 │ ——————
                            246315 │ 152364
                            423651 │ 153246
                            246351 │ ——————
                            423615 │ 126543
                            243651 │ 125634
                            426315 │ ——————
                            462135 │ 164235
                            641253 │ 162453
                            642135 │ ——————
                            461253 │ 143652
                            416235 │ _bob_
                            142653 │ 134625
                            412635 │ ——————
                            146253 │ 165324
                            142635 │ _bob_
                            416253 │ 156342
                            146235 │ ——————
                            412653 │ 132546
                            421635 │ 135264
                            246153 │ ——————
                            241635 │ 124365
                            426153 │ 123456

_Colledge Bob the fourth._ When the Treble leaves the two hind bells,
they dodg until it comes there again; and then the two first bells dodg
until the Treble gives way for the two hind bells to dodg again, and
then the two first bells cease dodging.


                       _Colledge Bob the Fifth._

                           _123456_│ 632514
                            214365 │ _&c._
                            124356 │ 163542
                            213465 │ _bob_
                            231456 │ 136524
                            324165 │ ——————
                            321456 │ 163425
                            234165 │ _bob_
                            324615 │ 136452
                            236451 │ ——————
                            234615 │ 163254
                            326451 │ 162345
                            234651 │ ——————
                            326415 │ 126543
                            324651 │ 125634
                            236415 │ ——————
                            326145 │ 152436
                            231654 │ 154263
                            236145 │ ——————
                            321654 │ 145362
                            312645 │ _bob_
                            136254 │ 154326
                            316245 │ ——————
                            132654 │ 145623
                            136245 │ _bob_
                            312654 │ 154632
                            132645 │ ——————
                            316254 │ 145236
                            361245 │ 142563
                            632154 │ ——————
                            631245 │ 124365
                            362154 │ 123456

_Colledge Bob the fifth._ When the Treble leaves the two hind bells,
they dodg until it comes there again. And when it leaves the two first
bells they lie still one change, dodg the next, and so by turns until it
comes down there again; during which time the bells in the third and
fourth places dodg except when the Treble hindereth them.

By these methods each of them will go 120 changes, and by making of
_bobs_ they will go 240, 360, or 720. In the first of them the bell in
the second place lieth still at the _bob_-changes, and in the other four
the bell in the fourth place always lieth still.

To ring 240. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must then
be made, as in these peals here prickt; where, in the first peal the 4
is the _half-hunt_, and in the other four peals the 2 is the
_half-hunt_.

To ring 360. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ dodg together
behind, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 720. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must then
be made, except when the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and then
not.

In the 360 or 720 of each peal the 2 may be the _half-hunt_, and 4 the
_quarter-hunt_ or others at pleasure.


                           _The Experiment._

_Triples and Doubles._ The Treble is the _whole-hunt_, but never hunteth
up farther than the fourth place, for the four first bells go _Doubles
and Singles_; and every time the Treble leads an _extream_ is made in
the third and fourth places, according to the common course of _doubles_
and _singles_ upon, four bells; which course of _doubles_ and _singles_
must be continued, the two hind bells in the mean time dodging, until
the making of the first _Parting_ change, which will separate the two
hind bells; and then the four first bells go the same course of
_doubles_ and _singles_ again, the two hind bells dodging as before,
until the making of the second _Parting_ change, and so successively.
The _Parting_ change is a _double_ change on the four middle bells, and
made at the leading of the Treble. The first _Parting_ change may be
made either at the first second or third leading of the _Treble_,
observing, that whatsoever bell in the first _Parting_ change moves down
to the Treble, when the Treble leads and that bell lieth next it again,
the second _Parting_ change must then be made. And whatsoever bell in
the second _Parting_ change moves down to the Treble when the Treble
leads, and that bell lieth next it again, the third _Parting_ change
must then be made, and so successively. There being five _Parting_
changes in the Peal, and as many _half-hunts_, each of the bells (the
Treble excepted) taking that place one after another; and consequently,
the five persons that ring them must call the _Parting_ changes one
after another as their turn comes, according to the aforesaid rule.


                      _Changes upon Seven Bells._

The methods upon _five_ may be prickt upon _seven_, observing but the
true difference of proportion in the changes; that is, _doubles_ upon
_five_ bells must be _triples_ upon _seven_; _doubles_ and _singles_
upon _five_ must be _triples_ and _doubles_ upon _seven_, _&c._


                            _Plain Triples._

All the bells have a direct hunting course. All peals upon _six_ bells
wherein half the changes are _triples_, will go upon _seven_ according
to this method here prickt; two of the changes upon _six_ being always
made at the leadings of the Treble, the six hindmost bells making them:
the first is a _triple_ change brought in by the course of the bells,
and the next must either be _double_ or _single_ according to the method
of the changes upon _six_.

                               _1234567_
                                2143657
                                2416375
                                4261735
                                4627153
                                6472513
                                6745231
                                7654321
                                7563412
                                5736142
                                5371624
                                3517264
                                3152746
                                1325476


                           _Dodging Triples._

_Triples_ and _Doubles_ upon _six_ may also go upon _seven_, according
to this method here prickt, but in the same manner as the former.

                               _1234567_
                                2143576
                                2415367
                                4251376
                                4523167
                                5432617
                                4523671
                                5432761
                                4523716
                                5432176
                                5341267
                                3514276
                                3152467
                                1325476
                                1352746


                        _Colledge Bob Triples._

                          _1234567_│ 6745312
                           2135476 │ 7654132
                           2314567 │ 7561423
                           3241657 │ 5716243
                           3426175 │ 5172634
                           4362715 │ 1527364
                           4637251 │ 1253746
                           6473521 │

Every time the Treble leaves leading, the bell in the third place lieth
still, whilst the four hind bells dodg; but otherwise all the bells have
a direct hunting course as Plain _Triples_. By this method it will go
_seventy_ changes, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 350. The rule for
the _bobs_ is this; when the Treble goeth to lead, if the _half-hunt_
lying before gives it place, then a _bob_ must be made at that change,
wherein the bell in the third place lieth still, and the four hind bells
dodg; so that at every _bob_ the four hind bells make two dodges before
they part. By making of two _extreams_ it will go 700, and with four
_extreams_ it will go 1400. But by making of intervening _bobs_ it will
go 700 compleat _triples_ without any _extream_; 1400 with two
_extreams_, and 2800 with four _extreams_. Any bell may be made a
_half-hunt_.


                _Colledge Bob, Triples: the second way._

                _1234567_│ 4536271 │ 7162534 │ 7326145
                 2135476 │ 5463721 │ 1726354 │ 3762415
                 2314567 │ 5647312 │ 1273645 │ 3674251
                 3241576 │ 6574132 │ 2176354 │
                 3425167 │ 6751423 │ 2713645 │
                 4352617 │ 7615243 │ 7231654 │

When the Treble leaves leading, the two hind bells dodg until Treble
parts them; but in all other respects ’tis the same with the former, and
the _bobs_ made in the same manner, and by the same rule as in that
peal, and it will go as many changes also as that.


                  _Colledge Triples, dodging behind._

                _1234567_│ 5346271 │ 7165324 │ 3675124
                 2143576 │ 3564721 │ 1756342 │ 6357214
                 2415367 │ 3657412 │ 1753624 │ 6532741
                 4251376 │ 6375142 │ 7135642 │
                 4523167 │ 6731524 │ 7316524 │
                 5432617 │ 7613542 │ 3761542 │


             _Colledge Triples, dodging before and behind._

                _1234567_│ 2436571 │ 4126753 │ 4726153
                 2143576 │ 4263751 │ 1462735 │ 7462513
                 2415367 │ 2467315 │ 1467253 │ 4765231
                 4251376 │ 4276135 │ 4176235 │
                 2453167 │ 2471653 │ 4712653 │
                 4235617 │ 4217635 │ 7421635 │

Each of these two peals by the method here prickt will go _Eighty four_
changes; and then when the Treble leads, and the _half-hunt_ lieth next
it, a _Parting_ change being then made, they will go 420. And by making
of _bobs_ they will go 5040. 2 may be the _half-hunt_, or any other at
pleasure. The _Parting_ change is a _double_ on the four middlemost of
the six hind bells.

’Tis plainly demonstrable, that the _Principle_ upon _five_ may go 420
_triples_ upon _seven_, which is a twelfth part; 840, which is a sixth
part; or 1260, which is a fourth part of the whole, and the utmost
period of _triple_ changes. And then by making of four _extreams_ it may
go 5040, the compleat peal.

Great variety of peals may be prickt upon seven: as _Triples_, _Triples
and Doubles_, _Triples Doubles and Singles_; _Doubles_, _Doubles and
Singles_, _&c._ But changes upon _seven_ being seldom practised, I will
therefore forbear to wast more paper in pricking down examples, and
proceed to the changes on _eight_.


                      _Changes upon Eight Bells._

_Sixscores_ upon _five_ bells are commonly rung upon _eight_, three
bells lying behind. The most musical to lie behind are 218, 418, 148,
248, 348, 468, 648, 548, 864, 241, 321, and 135 to be laid behind, and
then 1 and 3 to dodg throughout the peal. And also 184 to be laid
behind, and to go the six changes thus, 814. 841. 481. 418. 148. 184.
814. &c. and so on to the end of the _sixscore_. They may go the _sixes_
either at whole or half-pulls. Peals upon _six_, as _Triples_ and
_Doubles_, _&c._ make exceeding good musick upon _Eight_, 48. 68. 41. or
18. lying behind. Or else _Triples_ and _doubles_ upon the six middle
bells, the Treble leading, and the Tenor lying behind. And also
_Triples_ upon _seven_, the Tenor lying behind. But for such as have not
yet attain’d the skill to ring these compleat peals, _Sett-changes_ are
very proper for them, being easie and rung with little difficulty.


                          _Colledge Grounds._

The _grounds_ of these _sett-changes_ are of two kinds. First, placing
of the bells _Fifths_, or secondly _Thirds_. To place them _fifths_; the
4 must hunt up behind the 7, the 3 behind the 6, and the 2 behind the 5.
Or else the 5 may hunt down under the 2, the 6 under 3, and the 7 under
4. Or otherwise, first a _single_, then a _double_, and then a _triple_
change to be made on the middlemost bells, all which are to one effect;
for then the bells will lie _fifths_ thus, 15. 26. 37. 48. Here are four
_Concords_ to be chiefly regarded in the peal. The first is 15. the
second 26. the third 37. and the fourth is 48. These four _Concords_ may
go the methods of any changes upon four bells; 1.5 being taken for the
Treble, 2.6 for the Second, 3.7 for the Third, and 4.8 for the Fourth;
and the _Concords_ to change places with each other at pleasure. Wherein
’tis observable, that the two notes of every _Concord_ must constantly
attend each other in their motion; that is, whensoever one of the two
notes moves, the other must follow it. For example: admit they were to
go the _twenty four_ changes, and that 1.5 were to hunt up over 2.6,
3.7, and 4.8. first therefore it must move up over 2.6, wherein it makes
four changes: for first, the 5 moves up over the 2 thus, 12563748, the 1
must follow it thus, 2156.37.48. Then the 5 moves up over 6. 2165.37.48.
the 1 follows it again 26.15.37.48; here the two _Concords_ have made a
change. In which manner also 1.5 must move up over 3.7. and 4.8. And in
this manner are the _Concords_ to move and change places with each other
throughout the peal. Or secondly, to place the bells _thirds_, the 64
and 2 must hunt up, or else the 357 down; or otherwise a _triple_, a
_double_, and a _single_ change to be made on the middlemost bells; all
which are to one and the same effect, for then the bells will lie
_thirds_ thus, 13.57.24.68. Here are also four _Concords_ principally to
be regarded in the peal: the first is 1.3, the second 5.7, the third
2.4, and the fourth 6.8. These four _Concords_ may also go the methods
of any changes upon four bells, 1.3 being taken for the _treble_, 5.7
for _second_, 2.4 for the _third_, and 6.8 for the _fourth_, and they
must move in the same manner as before I have shewed. By these _Grounds_
great variety of excellent and Musical changes are to be rung. If they
go the _twenty four_, then the peal will consist of four times that
number, that is, _ninety six_ changes. But they may go only the first
eight changes of the _twenty four_, and then the peal will consist of
_thirty two_. Or else the first eight changes of a _twenty four_ doubles
and Singles, which will consist of _forty eight_ if the double changes
of the _twenty four_ are singled, otherwise but _thirty two_ as before.
Any _Concord_ may be made a _hunt_ and to move either up or down at the
beginning: so that these _Grounds_ afford great diversity. In the
ringing of these _Sett-changes_ the notes will lie sometimes _fifths_,
sometimes _thirds_, and sometimes _thirds_ and _fifths_, and then ’tis
pleasant Musick to _Clam_ them, that is, the two notes of each _Concord_
to strike together; and if they are _clam’d_ true, the eight bells will
strike as if they were but four, but with far greater harmony. They may
_Clam_ two or three bouts, and then strike open as many, and so
alternately; or else they may _Clam_ one pull, open the next, and so on.
To reduce the notes of the _fifths_ to their right places again at the
conclusion of the peal, either 234 must hunt down, or else 765 up; or
otherwise a _Triple double_ and _single_ change to be made on the
middlemost bells, all which are to one effect, and will bring the bells
round. To reduce the _thirds_ either move down 246 into their places, or
else move up 753 into theirs; or otherwise make _single_, _double_, and
_triple_ change on the middlemost bells; all which are to one effect,
and will bring the bells again round.


The methods of all peals upon _six_ bells may be prickt upon _eight_,
observing but proportion in the changes, according to the difference in
the number of bells, _viz._ _Triples_ and _doubles_ upon _six_ must be
_quadruples_ and _triples_ upon _eight_. _Doubles_ upon _six_ must be
_Triples_ upon _eight_, _&c._


                              _Bob-Major._

                               _12345678_
                                21436587
                                24163857
                                42618375
                                46281735
                                64827153
                                68472513
                                86745231
                                87654321
                                78563412
                                75836142
                                57381624
                                53718264
                                35172846
                                31527486
                                13254768
                                13527486

_Plain Quadruples_ and _Triples_. All the bells have a direct hunting
course until the Treble leads, and then the six hindmost bells dodg. By
this method it will go 112. And by making of _bobs_ it will go 224, 336,
or 672. The _bob_ is a _triple_ change at the leading of the Treble,
wherein the bell in the _4th_ place lieth still.

To ring 224. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind, a _bob_ must
then be made.

To ring 336. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ dodg together
behind, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 672. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind, a _bob_ must
then be made, except when the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and
then not. The 2 may be the _half-hunt_, and 4 the _quarter-hunt_, or
others at pleasure.

By making of two _extreams_ it will go 1344, and with four _extreams_ it
will go 2688.

All peals upon _six_ bells wherein half the changes are _triples_, will
go upon _eight_ according to the method before prickt, but after this
manner. If it is a peal upon _six_, which consists of 360 or 720
changes, then in the ringing of it upon _eight_ there must be five
_hunts_. The Treble may be the first _hunt_; 2 the second _&c._ Now the
method of the peal must go on according to that before prickt until the
Treble leads, and the 2 lie next it, and then two of the changes upon
_six_ are always made, the six hind bells making them: the first is
always a _triple_ change brought in by the course of the bells thus,
12436587, and the second either _double_ or _single_ according to the
method upon _six_; and the _third_ _fourth_ and _fifth_ Hunts in eight,
are the _whole_ _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ in the changes upon _six_. By
this method it will go 40320 compleat, but then every _112th_ change
will be a _double_, and sometimes _single_ in some peals. The bells may
be brought round at 672 in some peals, but in others not till 1344.


                         _Colledge Bob-Major._

                 _The   │   _The   │   _The   │   _The
               first._  │ second._ │ third._  │ fourth._
                        │          │          │
              _12345678_│_12345678_│_12345678_│_12345678_
               21436587 │ 21436587 │ 21436587 │ 21436587
               24163578 │ 24163578 │ 24135678 │ 24135678
               42615387 │ 42615387 │ 42316587 │ 42316587
               46251378 │ 24651378 │ 43261578 │ 24361578
               64523187 │ 42563187 │ 34625187 │ 42635187
               65432817 │ 24536817 │ 36452817 │ 24365817
               56348271 │ 42358671 │ 63548271 │ 42638571
               53684721 │ 24385761 │ 65384721 │ 24368751
               35867412 │ 42837516 │ 56837412 │ 42637815
               38576142 │ 24873156 │ 58673142 │ 24367185
               83751624 │ 42781365 │ 85761324 │ 42631758
               87315642 │ 24718356 │ 87516342 │ 24613785
               78136524 │ 42173865 │ 78153624 │ 42167358
               71863542 │ 41237856 │ 71856342 │ 41263785
               17685324 │ 14328765 │ 17583624 │ 14627358
               16758342 │ 13482756 │ 15786342 │ 16423785

_Quadruples and Triples._ The _first_ hath single dodging behind; the
_second_ single dodging before and behind; the _third_ double dodging
behind; and the _fourth_ double dodging before and behind. It may also
be prickt a _fifth_ way, _viz._ with single dodging before, and double
dodging behind. And likewise a _sixth_ way, _viz._ with doubled dodging
before, and single dodging behind. The dodging is without intermission
except when Treble hindreth, and also betwixt two bells until Treble
parts them. By this method each of them will go 112, and by making of
_bobs_ they will go 224, 336, or 672. The _bobs_ are _triple_ changes at
the leadings of the Treble; in the _first_ _second_ and _sixth_ the bell
in the _4th_ place lieth still at the _bobs_, and in the _third_
_fourth_ and _fifth_ the bell in the _2d_ place lieth still. The warning
for the _bobs_ is the same with that in _Bob-major_ next before. And the
_extreams_ made as in that peal, 2 may be the _half_ and 4 the
_quarter-hunt_ in the four first, or others at pleasure.


             _Colledge Triples, dodging before and behind._

                         _12345678_│ 42587613
                          21435687 │ 24578163
                          24153678 │ 42571836
                          42513687 │ 24517863
                          24531678 │ 42157836
                          42536187 │ 41275863
                          24563817 │ 14725836
                          42568371 │ 17452863
                          24586731 │

By this method it will go 112, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 224,
336, or 672. The _bob_ is a _triple-change_ at the leadings of the
Treble, wherein the bell in the _4th_ place lieth still. The warning for
the _bobs_ is the same with that in _Bob-major_, and the _extreams_ also
the same as in that peal. The 2 may be the _half-hunt_, and 4 the
_quarter-hunt_, or others at pleasure.


                        _The Wild-Goose Chase._

                               _12345678_
                                21536784
                                25163748
                                52613784
                                56231748
                                65327184
                                63572814
                                36752841
                                37625481
                                73265418
                                72356148
                                27531684
                                25713648
                                52173684
                                51237648
                                15327684
                                13572648
                                31752684
                                37125648
                                73215684
                                72351648

_Triples._ The _fourth_ bell must first hunt up into the _7th_ place and
then the 4 and 8 continually dodg behind throughout the peal, except
when the Treble hindreth them. The bell that moves up into the _6th_
place when the Treble moves down from thence, lieth still there until
the Treble displaceth it; during which time the two hind bells dodg, and
the five first go a perfect hunting course. And also when the Treble
moves up out of the _5th_ place, the five first bells go a hunting
course until it comes down there again. By this method it will go
_eighty_ changes, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 160, 240, or 480.
The _bob_ is a _triple_ change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the
bell in the _4th_ place lieth still.

To ring 160. Every time the _half-hunt_ maketh a change in the _2d_ and
_3d_ places, a _bob_ must at the same time be made.

To ring 240. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ make a change
together in the second and third places, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 480. Every time the _half-hunt_ maketh a change in the second
and third places, a _bob_ must then be made, except when the
_quarter-hunt_ makes a change there with it, and then not. The 2 may be
the _half-hunt_, and 6 the _quarter-hunt_, or others at pleasure.


                  _Colledge Triples, dodging behind._

                         _12345678_│ 62345178
                          21435687 │ 26431587
                          24153678 │ 24613578
                          42513687 │ 42163587
                          45231678 │ 41236578
                          54326187 │ 14326587
                          53462817 │ 13462857
                          35642871 │ 31642875
                          36524781 │ 36124857
                          63254718 │ 63214875

The method of ringing this peal is the same in all respects with that
next before, with this only difference. Every time the _whole-hunt_
leads, the _triple_ change is here made on the six middle bells, which
parts the two hind-bells, and so introduceth them by degrees into the
body of the peal. By this method it will go 112, and by making of _bobs_
it will go 224, 336, or 672. The _bob_ is a _triple_ change at the
leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the _6th_ place lieth still.
The warning for the _bobs_ in the 224 is the same with that in the 160
next before. In the 336 ’tis the same with that in the 240 next before.
And in the 672 ’tis the same with that in the 480 next before. 2 may be
the _half-hunt_ and 5 the _quarter-hunt_, or others at pleasure.


                        _The Grand Experiment._

_Quadruples and Triples._ The Treble is the _whole-hunt_, but never
hunteth up farther than the sixth place; for the six first bells go
_triples_ and _doubles_, it matters not of what sort, provided that the
_double_ changes at the leadings of the Treble are always made on the
four hindmost of the six bells; which course of _triples_ and _doubles_
must be continued, the two hindmost of the eight bells in the mean time
dodging until the first _Parting_ change is made, which will separate
the two hindmost bells; and then the six first bells go the same course
of _triples_ and _doubles_ again, the two hindmost bells in the mean
time dodging as before, until the second _Parting_ change is made, and
so successively. The _Parting_ change is a _triple_ change on the six
middle bells, and made at the leadings of the _whole-hunt_. The first
_Parting_ change may be made either at the first second third fourth or
fifth leading of the Treble; observing, that whatsoever bell in the
first _Parting_ change moves down to the Treble, when the Treble leads
and that bell lieth next it again, the second _Parting_ change must then
be made. And again, whatsoever bell in the second _Parting_ change moves
down to the Treble, when the Treble leads and that bell lieth next it
again, the third _Parting_ change must then be made, and so
successively; there being seven _Parting_ changes in the peal, and as
many _half-hunts_, each of the _seven_ bells taking that place one after
another. So that the seven persons that ring the _2d_, _3d_, _4th_,
_5th_, _6th_, and _7th_ bells, must call the _Parting_ changes one after
another, according as the aforesaid rule directs them: or else he that
rings the Treble may do it, but not so well as the rest. To ring it with
such peals upon six bells which consist of single courses, it will go
420; with double courses 840. This peal may also be rung _triples_, that
is, the six first bells to go _doubles_, the two hind bells in the mean
time dodging, and the _Parting_ changes to be made as before. But in
ringing it with such Peals of _Triples_ and _Doubles_, or else _Doubles_
upon six bells, where the _double_ change at every leading of the Treble
is made in the _2d_ _3d_ _5th_ and _6th_ places, there, whatsoever two
bells lie next the Treble at the first _Parting_ change, the same two
bells will lie next it at every _Parting_ change, which will be a rule
for calling them, there being only five _Parting_ changes in it, which
are _triples_ as before. The first _Parting_ change may also here be
made either the first second third fourth or fifth time the Treble
leads. If it is rung with peals upon _six_ bells, consisting of single
Courses, it will then go 300, with double Courses 600. This peal may
also be rung by _Concatenating_ of divers kinds of methods. For as the
peal consists of several parts, _viz._ from one _Parting_ change to the
next, being accounted a compleat part; so each part may be rung by a
different method from the rest. For any peals upon six bells, whether
_doubles_, or _triples and doubles_, consisting either of single or
double Courses, may indifferently be rung together in this peal,
succeeding each other in the several parts of it, and at every _Parting_
change a new method to begin. Or else any two of them to succeed each
other alternately throughout the parts of the peal, or more or less at
pleasure. But still observing, that all that are rung together in one
peal must be such, where the _doubles_ at the leadings of the Treble are
made on the four hindmost of the six bells; or else all of them such,
where the _doubles_ at the leadings of the Treble are made in the second
and third, and the fifth and sixth places. If they are of the first
kind, then there will be seven _Parting_ changes in the peal, and as
many _half-hunts_; and the _half-hunts_ must successively call the
_Parting_ changes as before I have shewed: if of the later kind, then
but five _Parting_ changes, which must be call’d by the same rule as
before I have shewed in ringing it with one peal of this kind. And also
observing, if the first _Parting_ change is made at the first second
third or fourth leading of the Treble, then whatsoever method it goes at
first, it must also go the same again after the last _Parting_ change is
made. But in ringing it with peals of the first kind, the second being
made the first _half-hunt_, and to call the first _Parting_ change; and
with peals of the later, the _3d_ likewise: then the last _Parting_
change in either of them will conclude the peal.

This peal may go the method of the _Experiment_ upon _six_ bells, _page
162_, that is, the four first bells to go the _Twenty four_ Doubles and
Singles as in that peal; and the four hindmost bells in the mean time to
dodg double. The _Parting_ changes are _triples_ on the middle bells,
and the same rules observed in making and calling them, as in that peal:
but here are seven of them in this, and 168 changes.

The _Experiment_ upon _six_ may also be rung _Comprehensively_ herein.
The six first bells to go that compleat peal, the two hindmost of the
eight bells in the mean time dodging; and every time the _3d_ bell comes
to call the _Parting_ change on six, then instead of it a _Grand_ change
must be made, that is, a _triple_ on the six middle bells: and then the
six first bells to go the compleat peal again, the two hindmost bells in
the mean time dodging as before, untill the third bell calls another
_Grand_ change, and so successively; there being three of them in the
peal, and 360 changes. If the bells are placed 23567148 at the
beginning, the 4.8 will dodg behind the first _sixscore_ of it, 4.1 the
second, and 1.8 the third, and then the _5th_ may call the _Grand_
changes in the place of the _3d_; or any other three bells may be laid
behind at first, for the sake of Musical dodging. The first _Grand_
change may be made either at the first second third fourth or fifth
_Parting_ change, observing, that whatsoever bell at the first _Grand_
change should then in course have call’d a _Parting_ change, every time
that bell comes to call a _Parting_ change, it must call a _Grand_
change in the place of it: or else any one of the six first bells (the
_whole-hunt_ excepted) may be appointed beforehand to attend the calling
of the _Grand_ changes, observing, that every time that bell comes to
call a _Parting_ change, a _Grand_ change must be call’d in the place of
it.


                            _Imperial Bob._

_Quadruples and Triples._ The Treble hath a dodging course. The two
first and two last bells always dodg until the Treble hindreth them, and
in the mean time the two next bells to those dodging bells do lie still
one change, dodg the next, and so by turns until the Treble also
hindreth them. And the two bells in the fifth and sixth places whilst
the Treble is behind, and those in the _3d_ and _4th_ places when ’tis
before dodg, until Treble likewise hindreth them. By this method it will
go 224, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 448, 672, or 1344. The _bob_
is a _triple_ change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in
the fourth place lieth still.

              _12345678_│ 42361875 │ 16847253 │ 14283675
               21436587 │ 24368157 │ 16482735 │ ————————
               12346578 │ 42631875 │ ———————— │ 18645273
               21435687 │ 24613857 │ 18765432 │ 18462537
               24136578 │ 42168375 │  _bob_   │ ————————
               42315687 │ 24618357 │ 17864523 │ 16587432
               24135678 │ 42163875 │ ———————— │  _bob_
               42316587 │ 41268357 │ 16573824 │ 15684723
               24361578 │ 14623875 │  _bob_   │ ————————
               42635187 │ 41263857 │ 15678342 │ 18753624
               24631578 │ 14628375 │ ———————— │  _bob_
               42365187 │ 14263857 │ 17352648 │ 17856342
               24635817 │ 41628375 │ 17536284 │ ————————
               42368571 │ 14268357 │ ———————— │ 15372846
               24365817 │ 41623875 │ 13274586 │ 15738264
               42638571 │ 46128357 │ 13725468 │ ————————
               24365871 │ 64213875 │ ———————— │ 13254768
               42638517 │ 46123857 │ 12438765 │ 13527486
               24635871 │ 64218375 │ 12347856 │ ————————
               42368517 │ 46281357 │ ———————— │ 12436587
               24638157 │  _&c._   │ 14826357 │ 12345678

To ring 448. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must then
be made, as in this here prickt, where 2 is the _half-hunt_.

To ring 672. Every time the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_ dodg together
behind, a _bob_ must then be made.

To ring 1344. Every time the _half-hunt_ dodgeth behind a _bob_ must
then be made, except when the _quarter-hunt_ dodgeth there with it, and
then not. The 2 and 4 may be the _half_ and _quarter-hunts_, others at
pleasure.




                          NOTTINGHAM _Peals_.


                        Nottingham _Mixt Peal_.
                                 1.6.2.

                                _123456_
                                 214365
                                 241635
                                 426153
                                 462513
                                 645231
                                 654321
                                 563412
                                 536142
                                 351624
                                 315264
                                 132546
                                 132564
                                 ——————

The Changes are plain _Trebles_ and _Doubles_ until the Treble leads,
and then a _single_ change is always made. The Peal called _Old Doubles
and Singles_ upon five bells is the ground of this Peal, every _single_
in this peal being the _single_ in that. For as in that peal the
_whole-hunt_ is one of the two bells that make every _single_; so
likewise in this, the 6 being the _half-hunt_, is one of the two bells
that makes every _single_ change herein, except when it lieth next the
_whole-hunt_, and then the _single_ is behind; but when 2 lieth also
next the 6, then _extream_ in the fourth and fifth places.


                   Nottingham _Trebles and Doubles_.
                                 1.2.3.

                                _123456_
                                 214365
                                 241356
                                 423165
                                 432615
                                 346251
                                 364521
                                 635412
                                 653142
                                 561324
                                 516342
                                 153624
                                 135264
                                 312546
                                 321564

The ordinary course is to move directly, except when the _whole-hunt_
passes either out of or into the _second_’s place, and then constantly
dodg behind. There are single and double _bobs_; the _bob_ is a _double_
change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the _4th_ place
lieth still. When the third _hunt_ dodges behind, the second _hunt_ then
leading, is a warning for the single _bob_ to be made at the next
leading of the Treble. And when the second and third _hunts_ dodg
together behind, is a warning for the double _bob_ to be made at the two
next leadings of the Treble. The two _extreams_ in the 720 must be made
according to the general rule in the _Introduction_, _p. 90_.


                        Nottingham _Single Bob_.
                                 1.5.2.

                          _123456_ │  341265
                           214365  │  314625
                           241635  │  136452
                           426153  │  _bob_
                           462513  │  163425
                           645231  │  614352
                           654213  │  641532
                           562431  │  465123
                           526413  │  456132
                           254631  │  541623
                           245361  │  514263
                           423516  │  152436
                           432156  │  154263

One time the Treble hunts quite up, the next time only up into the
fourth place, and so by turns, as in the example here prickt. The bells
observe the course of the Treble, and also dodg it being before; and
once in 120 changes _bob_, when that bell which is nominated for the
second _hunt_ lying behind twice, meets with the third _hunt_ when the
first _hunt_ is going to lead. The second and third _hunts_ are both
one.

               The first _single_, │The second _single_.
                      124365       │       123465
                      124356       │       123456


                            Nottingham _Bob.
                               1 and 2._

The Treble hath a dodging course, and every time it leads, the _double_
is on the four middle bells, except the _bobs_ which are made in the
_2d_ and _3d_, and the _5th_ and _6th_ places. The _bobs_ are single and
double. When the _whole-hunt_ leads and the _half-hunt_ lieth behind, is
a warning for a double _bob_ to be made at the two next leadings of the
Treble, there being but three changes betwixt the two _bobs_. And when
the _half-hunt_ lieth in the first and second places for twenty changes
together, is a warning for a single _bob_ to be made the second time the
Treble leads. The _extreams_ must be made according to the general rule
in the _Introduction_, _page 90_.

              _123456_│ 523614 │ 412635 │ 562314 │ 162453
               214365 │ 526341 │ 146253 │ 653241 │ 126543
               241635 │ 253614 │ _bob_  │ 635421 │ 215634
               426153 │ 235164 │ 164235 │ 364512 │ 216543
               421635 │ 321546 │ 612453 │ 365421 │ 125634
               246153 │ 325164 │ 621543 │ 634512 │ 152364
               264513 │ 231546 │ 265134 │ 643152 │ 513246
               625431 │ 213456 │ 261543 │ 461325 │
               624513 │ 124365 │ 625134 │ 463152 │
               265431 │ 142635 │ 652314 │ 641325 │
               256341 │ 416253 │ 563241 │ 614235 │


                             Redding _Bob_.

                           _123456_│ 324516
                            214365 │ 234561
                            124356 │ 325416
                            213465 │ 235146
                            231456 │ 321564
                            324165 │ 235164
                            231465 │ 321546
                            324156 │ 312564
                            234516 │ 135246
                            325461 │ 315264
                            235416 │ 132546
                            324561 │ 135264
                            235461 │

The treble hath a dodging course, and when it moves up out of the _2d_
place the two first bells dodg until it comes there again; and when it
moves down out of the _5th_ place, the two hind bells dodg until it
comes there again, except only whilst it dodgeth in the _3d_ and _4th_
places, and then the two hind bells lie still. When the Treble lieth
behind the _double_ is on the four first bells; and when it leadeth on
the four last. By this method it will go 120, and by making of _bobs_ it
will go 240, 360, or 720. At the _bobs_ the bell in the _4th_ place
lieth still. The rule of calling the _bobs_ is the same with that in the
_Colledge Bobs_, _page 162_.


             Redding _Bob according to the_ Cambridg _way_.

                                _123456_
                                 214365
                                 124356
                                 213465
                                 231456
                                 324165
                                 321456
                                 ——————
                                 ——————
                                 231654
                                 236145
                                 321654
                                 312645
                                 136254
                                 316245
                                 132654
                                 136245

This is the same with the former, excepting only the _double_ changes
which are made when the Treble dodgeth in the _3d_ and _4th_ places,
both in hunting up and down; which are here made on the four hind bells,
whereas in that they were made on the four first bells: so that here the
two hind bells dodg without intermission until the Treble hindreth them.
This will also go 240, 360, and 720, and the _bobs_ made by the same
rule as the former.

[Illustration: [Fleuron]]


                       _Fifteen_ OXFORD _Peals_.


                         _Adventure. 1 and 2._

                  _12345_ │ 35142  │ 12453  │ 15243
                   21435  │ 31542  │ —————  │ 15423
                   24135  │ 35124  │ 14235  │ 14532
                   21453  │ 31524  │ 14325  │ 14352
                   24153  │ 13254  │ 13452  │ —————
                   42513  │ 13524  │ 13542  │ 13425
                   42531  │ 15342  │ —————  │ 13245
                   45213  │ 15432  │ 15324  │ 12354
                   45231  │ —————  │ 15234  │_Extr._
                   54321  │ 14523  │ 12543  │ 12345
                   54312  │ 14253  │_Extr._ │
                   53421  │ 12435  │ 12534  │
                   53412  │_Extr._ │ —————  │

_Doubles and singles._ Every bell leads four times. The Treble hath a
dodging course; and is one of the two bells which makes every _single_
change except when it leads, and then ’tis made in the _3d_ and _4th_
places; but when the 2 lieth next it, an _extream_ behind.


                          _Camelion. 1 and 2._

                            _12345_│ 45213
                             21354 │ 45123
                             23145 │ 41532
                             23415 │ 14523
                             24351 │ 14253
                             42531 │ —————

Every time the Treble hunts up and down, it makes a _single_ in the
third and _4th_ places, and when it leads the _single_ is there also;
but when 2 lies next it, then an _extream_ behind. Every bell except the
Treble leads four times.


                           _Medley. 1 and 5._

                            _12345_│ 54132
                             21354 │ 54123
                             21345 │ 51432
                             23154 │ 51423
                             23145 │ 15243
                             32415 │ 15234
                             34215 │ 12543
                             32451 │ 12534
                             34251 │ —————
                             43521 │ 14352
                             45321 │ 14325
                             43512 │ 13452
                             45312 │ 13425

_Doubles and Singles._ The treble leads four times, lieth behind as
many, and twice in every other place. Every other bell leads four times.
Every _single_ is made behind, except when the Treble is either in the
fourth or fifth places, and then in the second and third places. Every
time the Treble goeth to lead and leaves leading, the _double_ is on the
two first and two last bells, except when the treble goeth to lead if
the _5th_ gives it place, and then the _double_ is made on the four
first bells.


                      Oxford _Paradox_. _1 and 5._

                            _12345_│ 54312
                             21435 │ 54132
                             21345 │ 45312
                             23154 │ 45132
                             23514 │ 41523
                             32154 │ 41253
                             32514 │ 14523
                             35241 │ 15423
                             35421 │ 14532
                             53241 │ 15432
                             53421 │

_Doubles and singles._ Every bell leads four times, and lieth behind as
many. Every _single_ is made in the third and fourth places until the
Treble leads, and then in the second and third places: but when the
Treble leads and the fifth lieth behind, then the _extream_ in the third
and fourth places.


                         _Halliwell. 1 and 2._

                            _12345_│ 54312
                             21354 │ 45312
                             21345 │ 54132
                             23154 │ 54123
                             23145 │ 51432
                             32415 │ 51423
                             23415 │ 15432
                             32451 │ 15423
                             34251 │ 14532
                             43521 │ 14523
                             45321 │ —————

Treble leads four times, lies behind as many, and twice in every other
place. When it leaves the two hind bells, they dodg until it comes there
again, except when it leads and 2 lies next it, for then an _extream_ is
made in the third and fourth places.


                           Oxford _Sixscore_.

                            _12345_│ 32514
                             21345 │ 32154
                             23145 │ 31254
                             23415 │ 13254
                             23451 │ 13524
                             32541 │

The Treble hath a direct hunting course, as in plain changes; and the
changes are all _single_ except when the Treble lieth behind, and then a
_double_ is made on the four first bells; and when it leads, the
_single_ is in the third and fourth places, but when 2 lieth next it an
_extream_ behind.


                          _Fortune. 1 and 2._

                            _12345_│ 13254
                             21354 │ —————
                             23145 │ 14523
                             32415 │ 14532
                             34251 │ —————
                             43521 │ 12354
                             45312 │_Extr._
                             54132 │ 12534
                             51423 │ —————
                             15432 │ 14352
                             15423 │ 14325
                             ————— │ —————
                             13245 │ _&c._

_Doubles._ The Treble is a perfect hunt, and when it leaves the two hind
bells they dodg until it comes there again. Every bell leads twice, and
then hunts directly up, unless the aforesaid dodging hindreth them.
Every time the Treble leads, a _single_ is made behind, except when 2
lieth next it, and then an _extream_ in the third and fourth places.


                          Oxford _Single Bob.
                     Triples, Doubles, and Singles.
                             1. 2. and 3._

                                _123456_
                                 214365
                                 241356
                                 423165
                                 432615
                                 346251
                                 364521
                                 635412
                                 653142
                                 561324
                                 516342
                                 153624
                                 156342
                                 513624
                                 531642
                                 356124
                                 365214

The Treble hath a direct hunting course; and when it leaves the two hind
bells they dodg until it comes there again. Every bell leads twice, and
then hunts directly up, unless the aforesaid dodging hindreth them. When
the Treble leads, the _double_ is on the four hind bells. By this method
it will go _sixty_ changes, and by making of _singles_ it will go 120,
240, 360, or 720. The _singles_ in the 120, 240, and 720, must be made
by the same method with those in _Old Triples and Doubles_, _page 109_.
And to ring 360, every time the 1.2 lie together before, the _single_
must be made behind; and when 1.2.3 lie together there, then the
_single_ in the fourth and fifth places.


                          Oxford _Double Bob.
                    Triples, Doubles, and Singles._

                           _123456_│ 246135
                            214365 │ 421653
                            241356 │ 412635
                            423165 │ 146253
                            243615 │ 142635
                            426351 │ 416253
                            243651 │ 461235
                            426315 │

When the Treble leaves the two first bells, they dodg until it comes
there again; but in all other respects ’tis the same with the former.
And the _singles_ in the 120, 240, 360, and 720, to be made as in that
Peal.


                          Oxford _Single Bob_.

The method of this Peal is the same in all respects with _Oxford Single
Bob, Triples Doubles and Singles_, excepting the _bobs_ in this peal,
which are made in stead of the _singles_ in that. By making of _bobs_ it
will go 180 or 360. The _bob_ is a _double_ change at the leading of the
Treble, wherein the bell in the fourth place lieth still.

To ring 180, there must be a _whole_ and _half-hunt_; and when the
_whole-hunt_ is before and the _half-hunt_ behind, the next change is to
be a _bob_.

To ring 360, there must be a _whole_, _half_, and _quarter-hunt_, _viz._

  First, when the _whole-hunt_ comes to lead, and the _half-hunt_ to
    fall behind, the next change is a _bob_: and

  Secondly, when the _whole-hunt_ leads before the _quarter-hunt_, and
    the _half-hunt_ is in the fifth place, the next change is also a
    _bob_.

The 1 and 5 may be the _whole_ and _half-hunts_ in the 180, and 1.5.3
the _whole_, _half_, and _quarter-hunts_ in the 360, or others at
pleasure.


                          Oxford _Double Bob_.

The method of this peal is the same in all respects with _Oxford double
Bob_ before, excepting the _bobs_ in this peal, which are made instead
of the _singles_ in that. The _bobs_ are here made in the same manner,
and call’d by the same rule in the 180 and 360, as in _Oxford single
Bob_ next before; and the two _extreams_ in the 720, both in this and
the last peal, must be made according to the general rule in the
_Introduction_.


                          Oxford _Triple Bob_.

                                _123456_
                                 214365
                                 124356
                                 213465
                                 231456
                                 324165
                                 321456
                                 234165
                                 243615
                                 426351
                                 423615
                                 246351
                                 264531
                                 625413
                                 624531
                                 265413
                                 256143
                                 521634
                                 526143
                                 251634
                                 215643
                                 126534
                                 216543
                                 125634
                                 152364
                                 513246
                                 153264
                                 512346
                                 521364

The Treble is the _whole-hunt_, and hath a dodging course. When it
leaves the two hind bells, they dodg until it leads, and then a _double_
is made on the four middle bells, which parts the two hind bells; but
then the two hind bells dodg again until the Treble displaceth them.
Every bell leads twice (except when the Treble dodgeth there) and as
they hunt up and down do make a dodg in the third and _4th_ places. When
the Treble moves up from dodging before, the bell that dodged there with
it continues in the first and _2d_ places, lying twice together in each,
until the Treble comes down to dodg there with it again. By this method
it will go 120, and by making of _bobs_ it will go 360. At the _bobs_
the bell in the fourth place lieth still. The warning for them is this,
When the _half-hunt_ leads, and the Treble moves down, and dodgeth there
with it, a _bob_ must then be made at that leading of the Treble. The 3
may be the _half-hunt_, or any other.


                  Oxford _Triple Bob, the second way_.

                           _123456_│ 254613
                            214365 │ 245163
                            124356 │ 421536
                            213465 │ 425163
                            231645 │ 241536
                            326154 │ 214356
                            321645 │ 123465
                            236154 │ 213456
                            263514 │ 124365
                            625341 │ 142635
                            623514 │ 416253
                            265341 │ 146235
                            256431 │ 412653
                            524613 │ 421563
                            526431 │ 245136

This peal is in all respects the same with that next before, except the
_double_ change which is made when the Treble moves up out of the second
place, and also down into that place again, which is here made on the
four middle bells, and consequently parts the two hind bells, which in
the former peal continued dodging together. This will also go 360, the
_bobs_ being made, in the same manner, and also the warning for them the
same, as in the former peal.


                 Oxford _Riddle, or the Hermophrodite_.

Treble is the _whole-hunt_; whilst ’tis hunting up the two last bells
dodg, and whilst

                           _123456_│ 341652
                            214365 │ 314562
                            241356 │ 135426
                            423165 │ 134562
                            432615 │ 315426
                            346251 │ 351462
                            432651 │ 534126
                            346215 │ 543216
                            436125 │

’tis hunting down the two first. Every time it leads and lieth behind,
the _double_ is made on the four farthest bells from it. Every bell
leads twice and lieth behind twice, except the dodging hinder. By this
method it will go _sixty_ changes _triples_ and _doubles_, and then by
making of _singles_ as in _Old triples_ and _doubles_, it will go 120,
240, or 720.


                            _My Lord. 144._

                                _123456_
                                 213465
                                 231456
                                 324156
                                 342516
                                 432561
                                 423651
                                 243615
                                 234165
                                 321465
                                 312456
                                 132465
                                 123645
                                 ——————

_Doubles._ _Treble_ is a perfect Hunt. Every bell leads twice, and then
moves up into the third place where it lieth twice, and then moves down
again except the motion of the Treble hindreth. When the Treble goeth to
lead and leaves leading, the _double_ is on the two first and two last
bells; and when it leadeth, ’tis on the four middle bells. But when it
leadeth, and the 6 lieth behind, then a _single_ in the third and fourth
places.

If a _double_ be made on the four hind bells, at every third leading of
the Treble it will go 180 compleat _doubles_; and then by making of two
_singles_ it will go 360, or with four _singles_ 720.

                  *       *       *       *       *




          _Seventeen Peals composed at_ CAMBRIDGE, by Mr. S.S.


                          _My Honey. 1 and 2._

                        _12345_│ 31254 │ 54321
                         21354 │ 31245 │ 45231
                         21345 │ 13254 │ 54231
                         23154 │ ————— │ 45213
                         23145 │ 13524 │ 54213
                         32415 │ 15342 │ 45123
                         23415 │ ————— │ 45132
                         32451 │ 15432 │ 41523
                         23451 │ 51423 │ 41532
                         32541 │ 51432 │ 14523
                         23541 │ 54123 │ —————
                         32514 │ 54132 │ 14253
                         23514 │ 45312 │ 12435
                         32154 │ 54312 │ —————
                         32145 │ 45321 │ 12453

In this peal there is a _whole-hunt_ and an _half-hunt_. The
_whole-hunt_ lieth always four times before, and four times behind, and
twice in every other place. The two hindmost bells always dodg ’till the
_whole-hunt_ hindreth, except when the _whole-hunt_ is before, at which
time there are four changes made of a four and twenty _doubles_ and
_singles_; the first of which is a double change brought in by the
course of the bells (as in the following peal appeareth) 13254; the
second is a _single_ in the third and fourth places (13524); the third
is a _double_ on the four last (15342), and the fourth a _single_ again
in the third and fourth places (15432), except when the _half-hunt_ is
with the _whole-hunt_ before, then it is to be an _extream_ behind. When
the _whole-hunt_ leaves the _third’s_ place hunting up, the two formost
bells dodg till it returns into the same place again.


                      _The Whirligigge. 1 and 5._

In this peal, first the bells dodg behind (and not before) till the
_whole-hunt_ hindreth them; and the next course they dodg in like manner
before (and not behind) till the _whole-hunt_ hindreth them; and so by
turns throughout the whole peal. When the _whole-hunt_ is before, if the
bells were dodging behind before it came to lead, single behind; if they
were dodging before, single in _second_’s and _third_’s place; and when
the _whole-hunt_ leads, and _half-hunt_ is in _Tenor_’s place, there is
always an _extream_ to be made in _3d_ and _4th_ place, which is every
fourth time the _whole-hunt_ leads.

                        21354│51243│31245│41352
                        23145│52134│32154│43125
                        32415│25314│23514│34215
                        34251│52341│25341│43251
                        43521│25431│52431│34521
                        45312│52413│54213│43512
                        54132│25143│45123│34152
                        51423│21534│41532│31425
                        15432│12354│14523│—————
                        15423│13254│14532│13425


                     _Jack-on-both-sides. 1 and 5._

                  21354│45132│52143│32514│23451│53421
                  23145│54312│25413│23541│32541│35412
                  32415│45321│52431│32451│23514│53142
                  34251│54231│25341│34215│32154│51324
                  43521│45213│52314│43125│31245│15234
                  34512│54123│25134│41352│13254│—————
                  43152│51432│21543│14325│13524│15243
                  41325│15342│12534│14235│31542│51423
                  14352│—————│12354│41253│35124│
                  14532│15324│21345│42135│53214│
                  41523│51234│23154│24315│35241│

In this peal the bells always dodg both before and behind, till the
_whole-hunt_ hindreth them; except when both the Hunts are together
either before or behind; for then the two farthest bells from the Hunts
do leave dodging for the next change onely which is always a _double_
made by the two Hunts and the two next bells to them. The _singles_ and
_extreams_ are made as in the _Old Doubles_.


                     Winwick _Doubles_. _1 and 3._

In this peal, first, the two hindmost bells dodg till the _whole-hunt_
hindreth them, till the first _single_ is made: and then the two formost
bells dodg ’till the _whole-hunt_ hindreth them, until there be made
another _single_, and so they continually dodg successively throughout
the whole peal. There are six _singles_ which are made in the same
manner as in St. _Dunstan’s Doubles_, _page 127_.

                        21354│41532│31254│41523
                        23145│45123│32145│45132
                        32415│54213│23415│54312
                        34251│52431│32451│45321
                        43521│25341│23541│54231
                        45312│23514│32514│45213
                        54132│32154│23154│54123
                        51423│31245│21345│51432
                        15432│13254│12435│15342
                        14523│—————│14253│—————
                             │13524│     │15324


                          _Non-such. 1 and 2._

In this peal the bells always dodg both behind and before till the
_whole-hunt_ hindreth them, except when both the Hunts are together
either behind or before: for then the bells omit dodging for the next
change, as in _Jack-on-both-sides_. There are four _singles_ which are
all made in the _3d_ and _4th_ places every third time that the
_whole-hunt_ leads.

                  21435│25134│32415│53214│54231│34521
                  24153│52314│23451│35241│45321│35412
                  42513│25341│32541│53421│43512│53142
                  24531│52431│23514│54312│34152│51324
                  42351│25413│32154│45132│31425│15342
                  24315│52143│31245│41523│13452│—————
                  42135│51234│13254│14532│14325│15432
                  41253│15243│—————│15423│41352│
                  14235│12534│13524│51432│43125│
                  12453│21354│31542│54123│34215│
                  21543│23145│35124│45213│43251│


                     Cambridg _Delight_. _2 and 4._

In this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg till the _whole-hunt_
hinders them. When the _whole-hunt_ leaves the _thirds_ place hunting
up, the two foremost bells dodg till the _half-hunt_ hinders them, whose
course is the same with the course of the _half-hunt_ in _Grandsire_.
There are two _singles_ which are made by the same rule as in
_Grandsire_.

                        13254│15243│14235│45231
                        31524│12534│41325│42513
                        13542│21543│43152│24531
                        31452│25134│34512│25413
                        34125│52143│35421│52431
                        43215│51234│53241│54213
                        42351│15324│52314│45123
                        24315│51342│25341│41532
                        23451│15432│23514│14352
                        32415│14523│32541│13425
                        34251│41253│35214│31245
                        43521│42135│53124│32154
                        45312│24153│35142│23145
                        54132│21435│53412│—————
                        51423│12453│54321│23154


                    Cambridg _Delight, another way_.
                               _1 and 4._

                           21354│51234│31524
                           23145│52143│35142
                           32415│25413│53412
                           34251│24531│54321
                           43521│42351│45231
                           45312│43215│42513
                           54132│34125│24153
                           51423│31452│21435
                           15432│13425│12453
                           14523│14352│14235
                           41532│41325│41253
                           45123│43152│42135
                           54213│34512│24315
                           52431│35421│23451
                           25341│53241│32541
                           52314│35214│23514
                           25134│53124│32154
                           21543│51342│31245
                           12534│15324│13254
                           15243│13542│—————
                                │     │13245

In this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg till the _whole-hunt_
hinders, as in the former Peal. When the _half-hunt_ leaves the _3ds_
place hunting up, the two foremost bells dodg till the _whole-hunt_
hinders. It differeth from the former peal in this; That whereas in that
the bells always begin to dodg before when the _whole-hunt_ leaves
_third’s_ place, and are parted by the _half-hunt_; in this they begin
to dodg before when the _half-hunt_ leaves the _third_’s place, and are
parted as well before as behind by the _whole-hunt_. It differeth also,
in that the _half-hunt_ in this peal always bobbeth behind on the
contrary stroke to what it doth in the former peal; there are two
_singles_, which are made as in the former peal.


                 _The Dream, upon five bells. 1 and 2._

In this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg till the _whole-hunt_
hinders, except when the two Hunts are together before. Or it may be
rang by making the two foremost bells dodg always, except the Hunts be
together behind. There are six single changes which are all behind every
other time the _whole-hunt_ leads, the _half-hunt_ at every _single_
lying either in the _2d_ or _3ds_ places.

                        21435│51342│41235│53142
                        24153│53124│42153│35412
                        42513│35214│24513│34521
                        45231│32541│25431│43251
                        54321│23451│52341│42315
                        53412│24315│53214│24135
                        35142│42135│35124│21453
                        31524│41253│31542│12543
                        13542│14235│13524│—————
                        15324│—————│15342│12534
                             │14253│51324│_&c._


               _The Contention upon five bells. 1 and 2._

In this peal, the two hindmost bells dodg as in the former peal till the
Hunts are together before for twenty changes; and then for the next
twenty changes the two formost bells dodg, except the Hunts are together
behind. There are six _singles_ which are made as in the former peal.

                        21435│51342│41523│41235
                        24153│53124│45132│42153
                        42513│35214│54312│24513
                        45231│32541│53421│42531
                        54321│23451│35241│24351
                        53412│24315│53214│42315
                        35142│42135│35124│24135
                        31524│41253│31542│21453
                        13542│14235│13452│12543
                        15324│—————│14325│—————
                             │14253│     │12534
                             │     │     │_&c._


                         _The Cheat. 1 and 3._

In this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg ’till the _whole-hunt_
hinders, and the two foremost bells dodg ’till either the _whole_ or
_half-hunt_ hinders. Or on the contrary, the two foremost bells may dodg
’till the _whole-hunt_ hinder, and the two hindmost ’till either the
_whole-hunt_ or _half-hunt_ hinder. Or it may be rang a third way, by
joining both these courses together, ringing twenty changes of it one
way, and the next twenty changes the other way throughout the peal.
There are six _singles_ which are all made behind, every second time the
_whole-hunt_ leads; or at pleasure it may be rang with twelve _singles_,
which are likewise all made behind.

                        21354│41532│31542│51243
                        23145│45123│35124│52134
                        32415│54213│53214│25314
                        34251│45231│52341│23541
                        43521│54321│25431│32451
                        45312│53412│52413│34215
                        54132│35142│25143│43125
                        51423│31524│21534│41352
                        15432│13542│12543│14325
                        14523│—————│15234│—————
                             │13524│     │14352
                             │     │     │_&c._


                       _Topsie-turvie. 1 and 2._

                        21354│41532│31542│21453
                        23145│45123│35124│24135
                        32415│54213│53214│42315
                        34251│45231│35241│24351
                        43521│54321│53421│42531
                        45312│53412│35412│24513
                        54132│35142│53142│42153
                        51423│31524│51324│41235
                        15432│13542│15234│14325
                        14523│—————│12543│—————
                             │13524│     │14352
                             │     │     │_&c._


                   _Jumping Doubles dodging before._

            _12345_│ 31254 │ 54132 │ 24513 │ 53241 │ 43521
             21534 │ 23145 │ 45213 │ 42351 │ 35421 │ 34215
             52143 │ 32514 │ 54321 │ 24531 │ 53214 │ 43152
             25314 │ 23451 │ 45231 │ 42315 │ 35142 │ 31425
             52431 │ 32541 │ 54312 │ 24153 │ 51324 │ 13254
             25341 │ 23415 │ 45123 │ 41235 │ 15432 │ —————
             52413 │ 32154 │ 51432 │ 14352 │ 14523 │ 13245
             25134 │ 21345 │ 15243 │ 13425 │ 41352 │ _&c._
             51243 │ 12453 │ 12534 │ 31542 │ 34125 │
             15324 │ 14235 │ 21453 │ 53124 │ 43512 │
             13542 │ 41523 │ 42135 │ 35412 │ 34251 │

In this peal every change is a jumping change (in which one bell leaps
over two bells at once,) except when the Treble is either behind or
before, for then there is always a plain _double_ change made, or else a
_single_ at the end of each sixty changes. Treble is a perfect Hunt; the
two foremost bells always dodg until the Treble hinder. When the Treble
is hunting up, the jumping changes are all made by the bell in the
Tenor’s place, jumping into _third’s_, except only that one when Treble
goeth out of _second’s_ place into _third’s_; for then the bell in the
_3ds_ place jumps into Trebles, where it dodgeth with the bell in the
_2ds_ place till Treble hinder. When Treble is hunting down every
jumping change is made by the bell in the _3ds_ place jumping into
Tenor’s, except when it goeth out of _third’s_ place into _second’s_,
for then the bell in Treble’s place jumps into _3ds_. And observe
always, that when Treble is going to lead the first time, the bell in
Tenor’s place jumps into _third’s_, and the next time the bell in the
_third’s_ place into Tenor’s throughout the peal. There are two
_singles_ which are made, as in _Grandsire_.


                   _Jumping Doubles dodging behind._

In this peal Treble is a perfect Hunt, as in the former. The two
hindmost bells always dodg till Treble hinders. When Treble is hunting
up the bell in _thirds_ place always jumps into Treble’s, excepting only
when Treble goeth out of _third’s_ place into _fourth’s_; for then the
bell in Tenor’s place jumps into _3ds_. And observe, that every second
time the Treble goeth out of _4th_ into _5ths_ place, the bell in
Treble’s place jumps into _3ds_; whereas at other times at the same
change the bell in _3ds_ place jumps into Treble’s. When Treble leaves
the _5ths_ place hunting down, the bell in the _3ds_ place jumps into
Treble’s; when she leaves _4ths_ place the bell in _3ds_ place jumps
into Tenor’s. When she is either in the _2d_ or _3ds_ places hunting
down, the bell in the Treble’s place jumps into _3ds_. There are two
_singles_ made, as in the former Peal.

            _12345_│ 31425 │ 52143 │ 24513 │ 25341 │ 34251
             31254 │ 43152 │ 25314 │ 45231 │ 52431 │ 23415
             23145 │ 34215 │ 32541 │ 54321 │ 45213 │ 32154
             32514 │ 42351 │ 23451 │ 35412 │ 54132 │ 21345
             53241 │ 24531 │ 42315 │ 53124 │ 41523 │ 13254
             35421 │ 52413 │ 24153 │ 31542 │ 15432 │ —————
             43512 │ 25134 │ 41235 │ 15324 │ 14523 │ 13245
             34125 │ 51243 │ 12453 │ 13542 │ 51432 │ _&c._
             41352 │ 12534 │ 14235 │ 51324 │ 45123 │
             13425 │ 15243 │ 21453 │ 35142 │ 54312 │
             14352 │ 21534 │ 42135 │ 53214 │ 43521 │


               _Symphonie, upon six bells. 1. 2. and 3._

In this peal are 720 changes, all _doubles_ except twelve _singles_,
which are made as in plain _Trebles and Doubles_ on six bells. The two
hindmost bells always dodg till the _whole-hunt_ hinders them, except
when a _single_ is made in the _4th_ and _5th_ places. When the
_whole-hunt_ leaves the _4ths_ place hunting up, the two foremost bells
dodg till it leaves the same place again hunting down: but it may be
rang at pleasure to make the bells dodg perpetually before as well as
behind, by making in every twelve changes two Trebles, one of them when
the _whole-hunt_ leaves the _3ds_ place hunting up, and the other when
it leaves the _4ths_ place hunting down; so that there will be in the
whole peal Sixscore _Treble-changes_. When the _whole-hunt_ is behind,
the four foremost bells dodg; when the _whole-hunt_ is before, the four
hindmost dodg.

                   213465│316254│615342│514623│412536
                   231456│361245│651324│541632│421563
                   234165│362154│653142│546123│425136
                   324615│632514│563412│456213│245316
                   234651│362541│653421│546231│425361
                   326451│635241│564321│452631│243561
                   236415│365214│654312│542613│423516
                   326145│635124│564132│452163│243156
                   321654│631542│561423│451236│241365
                   312645│613524│516432│415263│214356
                   132654│163542│156423│145236│124365
                   136245│165324│154632│142563│——————
                         │      │      │      │124635
                         │      │      │      │_&c._


                _Grandsire upon Symphonie. 1. 2. and 6._

This peal of _Symphonie_ may be rang with but two single or two treble
changes at the end of either _Eighteenscore_, by ringing it with single
and double _bobs_ as in _Grandsire Bob_. The rule for calling the _bobs_
in this peal is the very same as in _Grandsire Bob_, but when the
_bob_-changes are to be made, the Hunts do not lie in the same order as
in _Grandsire Bob_; for in this peal at a single _bob_ the _whole-hunt_
leads, the _half-hunt_ in the _5th_ place, and the _quarter-hunt_ in the
_4th_ place. And at the first _bob_ of a double _bob_ the _half-hunt_is
in Tenor’s place, and _quarter-hunt_ in _2ds_ place; and at the later
_bob_ the _half-hunt_ is in the _5th_ place, and _quarter-hunt_ in _2ds_
place, just contrary to what it is in _Grandsire Bob_. I have prickt
this peal with two Treble changes in every twelve; so that if you make
two Trebles more at the end of either _Eighteenscore_ (which must be
made when the _whole-hunt_ is going to lead just two changes sooner than
if you should have made a _single_) there will then be in the whole 720
just Sixscore and two Treble changes.

                   213465│316254│316542│316425│612354
                   231456│361245│361524│361452│621345
                   324165│632154│635142│634125│263154
                   234615│362514│365412│364215│623514
                   324651│632541│635421│634251│263541
                   236451│365241│364521│362451│625341
                   326415│635214│634512│632415│265314
                   236145│365124│364152│362145│625134
                   321654│631542│631425│631254│261543
                   312645│613524│613452│613245│216534
                   132654│163542│163425│163254│126543
                   136245│——————│——————│162345│125634
                         │136524│136452│      │_&c._


   _Trebles and Doubles on six Bells with six Singles. 1. 2. and 3._

                214365 │321456 │153462 │164352 │
                241635 │234165 │—————— │—————— │
                426153 │243615 │135426 │146532 │
                462513 │426351 │—————— │145623 │
                645231 │462531 │153246 │—————— │
                654321 │645213 │152364 │154263 │
                563412 │654123 │—————— │152436 │
                536142 │561432 │125634 │—————— │
                351624 │516342 │126543 │125346 │
                315264 │153624 │—————— │     ——│_sing._
                132546 │_bob._ │162453 │125364 │
                135264 │135642 │164235 │ _&c._ │
                312546 │—————— │—————— │       │
                       │       │146325 │       │
                       │       │_bob._ │       │

This peal is taken out of the _Dream upon five bells_. Every time the
_whole-hunt_ is before, there being two changes of that peal made in
this. Every bell is a perfect Hunt, when the _whole-hunt_ is before dodg
on the four hindmost, except the _half-hunt_ be either in the _5th_ or
Tenor’s place, then always _bob_ as in _Grandsire Bob_, except the
_quarter-hunt_ lieth next to the _half-hunt_, for then it is always to
be a dodg on the four hindmost. Every other time that the _whole-hunt_
and _half-hunt_ come together before, there is _single_ which is always
made behind.


         _A Twelvescore Trebles and Doubles._ _upon Six Bells._

                      214365│234165│261453│156423
                      241356│324156│216435│165243
                      423165│231465│124653│——————
                      243156│213456│214635│615234
                      421365│124365│126453│165324
                      412356│——————│162435│——————
                      143265│142635│614253│163542
                      142356│416253│612435│136452
                      413265│461235│164253│——————
                      431256│642153│146235│316425
                      342165│641235│412653│136245
                      432156│462153│142563│——————
                      341265│426135│——————│132654
                      314256│241653│145236│123564
                      132465│421635│154326│——————
                      134256│246153│——————│213546
                      312465│264135│514362│123456
                      321456│621453│154632│——————
                            │624135│——————│

In this peal the four foremost bells go a four and twenty _Doubles_ and
_Singles_, observing always, That for one Four and Twenty the bell in
the Treble’s place is the hunting bell, and for the next the bell in the
_4ths_ place throughout the peal, the two hindmost bells always dodging
till the end of the Twenty Four; at which time there is a _double_ made
(if the bell in the Treble’s place was the Hunt in the Twenty Four) on
the four middlemost; but if the bell in the _4ths_ place was the hunting
bell, the double is to be made in Treble and _2d_ and _4th_ and _5th_
places.


                            Cambridg _Bob_.

                           _123456_│ 325416
                            214365 │ 352146
                            123465 │ 531264
                            214356 │ 532146
                            241365 │ 351264
                            423156 │ 315246
                            421365 │ 132564
                            243156 │ 315264
                            234516 │ 132546
                            325461 │ 135264
                            324516 │ 312546
                            235461 │ 135246
                            324561 │ 312564
                            235416 │ 321546
                            234561 │ _&c._

The Treble hath a constant dodging course; and when it leaves the two
hind bells, they dodg until it comes there again, except when the Treble
dodgeth before, and then they lie still. The two middle bells always
dodg until the Treble comes there. When the Treble leaves dodging
before, every bell leads twice, except when the Treble lieth still
behind, and then the two first bells make a dodg. _Bobs_ are made as in
_Grandsire Bob_, and the warning for them the same also with that.




             _Fourteen more Peals, composed at_ CAMBRIDGE.


                  _Doubles and Singles on five Bells._


                        _The Parasite. 1 and 5._

In this peal the Bells behind always dodg, except the Treble prevents
them. When Treble is leaving the _3ds_ place hunting up, the bells
before dodg at whole pulls, if Tenor be not one of them, until it parts
them. The course of the bells in hunting is the same with _Tendring_.

                    _12345_│ 35241 │ 31524 │ 42531
                     21354 │ 35214 │ 31542 │ 42513
                     21345 │ 53124 │ 35124 │ 24153
                     23154 │ 53142 │ 35142 │ 24135
                     23145 │ 51324 │ 53412 │ 21453
                     32415 │ 51342 │ 53421 │ 21435
                     32451 │ 15324 │ 54312 │ 12453
                     23415 │ 15342 │ 54321 │ 12435
                     23451 │ 13524 │ 45231 │ 14253
                     32541 │ 13542 │ 45213 │ 14235
                     32514 │       │       │ _&c._


                         _The Tulip. 1 and 2._

                              21354│51423
                              21345│51432
                              23154│54123
                              23145│54132
                              32415│45312
                              32451│45321
                              23415│54312
                              23451│54321
                              32541│45231
                              32514│45213
                              23541│54231
                              23514│54213
                              32154│45123
                              32145│45132
                              31254│41523
                              31245│41532
                              13254│14523
                              13524│14253
                              15342│12435
                              15432│—————
                                   │12453
                                   │_&c._

In this peal Treble hunteth as in _Tendring._ When Treble is in
_third’s_ place hunting up, the bells dodg before at whole-pulls, till
it comes and parts them. When it is in _third’s_ place hunting down the
bells behind always dodg, except it leadeth, till it parts them. When
Treble is before there are four changes of twenty four _doubles_ and
_singles_; whereof the first is brought in by the hunting of the bells.
All the _singles_ in the Twenty four are made in the _3d_ and _4ths_
place, except 1–2 before, then _extream_ behind.


                      _The Honey-suckle. 1 and 2._

In this peal every bell leads four times. While every bell but Treble is
leading, the bells behind always dodg: every _4th_ change is made by the
four foremost bells. When Treble is leading there are four changes of
Twenty four _doubles_ and _singles_ made as in the former peal. The
first change is on the four bells before.

                     21435│53421│51342│24351│
                     21453│53412│51324│24315│
                     24135│35142│53142│42135│
                     24153│35124│53124│42153│
                     42513│31542│35214│41235│
                     42531│31524│35241│41253│
                     45213│13254│32514│14523│
                     45231│13524│32541│14253│
                     54321│15342│23451│12435│
                     54312│15432│23415│—————│
                          │     │     │12453│_&c._


                _Peals on 5 bells, with twelve Singles._


                          _Blunderbus. 1——2._

In this peal every bell is a Hunt. When Treble and _2d_ are together
either before or behind, the farthest bells from them dodg till either
of them part, excepting the _extreams_. When the Treble is before a
_single_ in _3d_ and _4th_ place, which is unmade the next time except
1——————2; for then the Hunts being together before, the bells behind
must dodg according to the rule forementioned.

                     21354│14325│13452│51234│23154
                     23145│41235│13542│15324│21345
                     32415│42153│31452│15234│12354
                     34251│24513│34125│51324│12534
                     43521│25431│43215│53142│—————
                     34512│52341│42351│35412│21543
                     43152│53214│24531│53421│25134
                     41325│35124│25413│35241│_&c._
                     14235│31542│52143│32514│


                          _Hudibras. 1 and 2._

In this peal every bell is a Hunt. When Treble is before a _single_
always in _3d_ and _4th_ place which is unmade the next time, except it
be 1——2, for then the bells behind dodg until Treble parts them.

                     21354│15423│14532│31245│25143
                     23145│51243│14352│13425│21534
                     32415│52134│41532│13245│12354
                     34251│25314│45123│31425│12534
                     43521│23541│54213│34152│—————
                     45312│32451│52431│43512│21543
                     54132│34215│25341│45321│25134
                     51423│43125│23514│54231│_&c._
                     15243│41352│32154│52413│


                      Weston _Doubles_. _1 and 5._

In this peal Treble is a perfect Hunt. Every other time Treble is
leaving the _3ds_ place hunting up, the bells before dodg till it comes
and parts them: the bells behind dodg but when Treble hinders them,
except the _extremes_ which are in _3d_ and _4ths_ place when it is 1——2
before; all the other _singles_ are made behind when Treble is leading.
It may be rang by making all the _singles_ behind, by making the change
before it is 1——2 on the bells before.

                _12345_│ 13254 │ 51432 │ 45123 │ 32514
                 21354 │ 13245 │ 15423 │ 41532 │ 23154
                 23145 │ 31254 │ 15432 │ 14523 │ 21345
                 32415 │ 32145 │ 51423 │ 14532 │ 12354
                 23451 │ 23415 │ 54132 │ 41523 │ —————
                 32541 │ 24351 │ 45312 │ 45132 │ 12534
                 23514 │ 42531 │ 54321 │ 54312 │ _&c._
                 32154 │ 45213 │ 45231 │ 53421 │
                 31245 │ 54123 │ 54213 │ 35241 │


                 _Peals on five bells with 10 singles._


                            _The Antilope._

In this peal the bells hunt as in _Grandsire_. When Treble is before, a
_single_ is always made by the Tenor, and the bell which followeth it,
except two _doubles_ which are made as the _singles_ in _Grandsire_. It
may be rang like _Cambridg delight_ either way by observing the same
method if like _Cambridg delight_ the common way; and by making the
_singles_ by the _half-hunt_ and the bell before it, if like _Cambridg
delight_ the other way.

             21354 │ 15243 │ 34152 │ 24531 │ 53214 │ 41253
             23145 │ 12543 │ 31425 │ 25413 │ 52341 │ —————
             32415 │ 21534 │ 13452 │ 52143 │ 25431 │ 15432
             34251 │ 25143 │ 13425 │ 51234 │ 24513 │ 14532
             43521 │ 52413 │ 31452 │ 15324 │ 42153 │ —————
             45312 │ 54231 │ 34125 │ 13524 │ 41235 │ 12354
             54132 │ 45321 │ 43215 │ 31542 │ 14253 │_Extr._
             51423 │ 43512 │ 42351 │ 35124 │ 14235 │ 13245


                            _The Maremaid._

                              13254│12435
                              31245│21345
                              32154│12354
                              23145│21534
                              21354│12543
                              12534│15234
                              15243│51243
                              51234│15423
                              52143│51432
                              25134│15342
                              21543│51324
                              21453│53124
                                   │_&c._

In this peal behind dodg twelve changes, excepting the sixth which is
made on the bells before, and the twelfth which is a _single_ in the
_3d_ and _4ths_ places; and twelve changes before, excepting also the
sixth, which is made by the bells behind, and the twelfth which is a
_single_ in _2d_ and _3ds_ places. When they dodg behind, every odd
change is on the last bells, and every even one a _bob_, excepting these
two changes. When they dodg before, every odd change is a _bob_, and
every even one on the four first bells, excepting likewise those two
changes which are made according to the forementioned rule.


                       _The Checkquer. 1 and 5._

                              21354│31254
                              23145│13524
                              32415│15342
                              34251│51432
                              43521│54123
                              45312│45213
                              54132│42531
                              51423│24351
                              15432│42315
                              14523│24135
                              41532│42153
                              45123│24513
                              54213│25431
                              52431│52341
                              25341│53214
                              23514│35124
                              32154│31542
                              31245│13452
                              13254│31425
                              13245│13425
                                   │_&c._

In this peal the Treble is _whole-hunt_, and Tenor the _half-hunt_ for
twenty changes; and then Tenor the _whole-hunt_ and _treble_ the
_half-hunt_ for the next twenty, and so they hunt by turns throughout
the peal. When Treble is the _whole-hunt_ the bells behind always dodg,
except it hinders them; and when Tenor is the _whole-hunt_, the bells
before, except that hinders them; when Treble is before and Tenor
dodging behind, a _single_ made by the Tenor and the bell which dodged
with it; when Tenor is behind and Treble dodging before, a _single_ made
by the Treble and the bell which dodgeth with that.

                              21354│12543
                              23145│21453
                              32415│24135
                              34251│42315
                              43521│43251
                              45312│34521
                              54132│35412
                              51423│53142
                              15432│35124
                              14523│53214
                              41532│35241
                              45123│53421
                              54213│54312
                              52431│45132
                              25341│41523
                              52314│14532
                              25134│15423
                              21543│51243
                              12534│15234
                              21534│15243
                                   │_&c._

This peal may be rang by hunting the Treble and Tenor as before, and it
differeth from it only in this; when it is 1——5 behind in the hunting of
the Treble, the bells before dodg till Tenor parts them; and when it is
1——5 before, in the hunting of the Tenor the bells behind dodg till
Treble parts them: and then when Treble is the _whole-hunt_ and Tenor
_half_, it is plain _Cambridg delight_ inverted. It may be rang by
hunting the _half-hunt_, as in _Cambridg Delight the other way_, in
either of those ways of ringing it, but then the _single_ is always made
by the hunting bell.

An example in that like _Cambridg Delight the other way_.


                           _Gogmagog. 1. 5._

                           21354│34512│12543
                           23145│43152│21534
                           32415│41325│25143
                           34251│14352│52413
                           43521│—————│54231
                           45312│14325│45321
                           54132│41352│43512
                           51423│43125│34152
                           15243│34215│31425
                           12534│32451│13452
                           21543│23541│—————
                           25134│25314│13425
                           52314│52134│31452
                           53241│51243│34125
                           35421│15234│_&c._

In this peal the bells hunt as in _Grandsire_, and it differeth from it
in this, That there is not every other time a single _bob_, but in stead
of a single one every other time a double one: so that only once in four
times there is a single _bob_; when Tenor is dodging behind there is
always a _single_ made by it, and the bell which dodgeth with it if
Treble leadeth, otherwise not.


                                _1——4._

This peal may be rung like _Cambridg Delight_, if every other time the
dodging before be omitted; or it may be rang by dodging constantly as in
_Cambridg Delight_, by making double _bobs_ and single _bobs_ as in
_Grandsire_: it may likewise be rang by making the course of the
_half-hunt_ in all the ways of ringing it the same with _Cambridg
delight the other way_; observing in all of them to make the _singles_
as before directed.

An example of that like _Cambridg Delight the other way_, in which the
dodging before is every other time omitted. 1——4.

                     21354│14523│12534│34152│25314
                     23145│41532│—————│31425│52134
                     32415│45123│12543│13452│51243
                     34251│54213│21534│14325│15234
                     43521│52431│25143│41352│—————
                     45312│25341│52413│43125│15243
                     54132│52314│54231│34215│51234
                     51423│25134│45321│32451│52143
                     15432│21543│43512│23541│


                  Cambridg _Marigold_. _1. 2. and 3._

                          214356│312564│165432
                          241536│321654│164523
                          425136│236154│——————
                          452316│263514│146253
                          453261│265341│142635
                          542361│623541│——————
                          543216│625314│124365
                          534126│652134│124635
                          351426│561234│_&c._
                          315246│516324│
                          132546│153624│
                          135264│156342│

In this peal are 720 changes, which are all _doubles_ except 12
_singles_ which are made as in Plain _trebles_ and _doubles_. _Treble_
is a perfect Hunt, and except the _dodges_ (which are the same as in
_Oxford double Bob_) every double change is made by the _treble_ and the
three next bells to it: observing always that the bell in _Tenor_’s
place lieth still ’till it giveth place to the _Treble_, or be removed
by a dodg behind when the _Treble_ is before. When _Treble_ leaveth
_3ds_ place hunting up, the bell that then comes before, leads thrice,
and likewise the next bell after it till _Treble_ cometh back into _3ds_
place again; at all other times every bell leads twice. The bell in
Tenor’s place lieth five times behind, (and when the _single_ is made in
the middle _ten_ times) till _treble_ remove it; and when _treble_ comes
back it lieth five times more behind, and then is displaced by a dodg
behind and hunts down at whole-pulls. This peal may be rang by making
_bobs_ single and double as in _Grandsire Bob_ with but two _singles_ or
two _trebles_, which must be made just Eighteen score changes one from
the other.


                    _The Nightingall. 1. 2. and 3._

In this peal are 720 changes, which are all _doubles_ except twelve
_singles_, which are made as in the former peal; and if you ring
_Grandsire Bob_ upon it, there may be but two singles, or else two
_trebles_, as in the _Marigold_. _Treble_ is a perfect Hunt: the bells
in _4th_ and _5th_ places dodg till _treble_ parts them, and then the
two foremost bells do the like for eight changes together till _treble_
hinders them, and gives way to the other two bells to dodg again in the
_4th_ and _5th_ places, which is always for three changes and no more,
except when the _single_ is made in that place, and then they dodg six
times. When _treble_ is behind, dodg the four first; when it is before
on the four last, as in _Marigold_.

                            123456 │356241
                            213546 │536214
                            231456 │356124
                            324156 │531624
                            234516 │513264
                            324561 │153624
                            235461 │156342
                            325416 │——————
                            235146 │165432
                            321546 │164523
                            312456 │——————
                            132546 │146253
                            135264 │142635
                            315624 │——————
                            351264 │124365
                            532164 │_sing._
                            352614 │124635
                            532641 │——————

                  *       *       *       *       *


                                 FINIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page Changed from                     Changed to

   14 1564364160                       1744364160

   14 29554290720                      29654190720

   14 2446144                          2496144

   14 99728079819200                   99638080819200

   14 1402645824276320                 1402556105125320

   15 561058329                        561022442

   15 140564582                        140255610.5

   18 one Load, consistng of five      one Load, consisting of five
      hundred                          hundred

   18 rate of thrteen shillings and    rate of thirteen shillings and
      four pence the                   four pence the

   21 I have therefoae penn’d the      I have therefore penn’d the
      following Treatise               following Treatise

   34 cannot soon attain, are          cannot soon attain, are
      therefore much puzled            therefore much puzzled

   47 which we will imagine so be made which we will imagine to be made
      at the                           at the

   59 2d. 3d. 4.                       2d. 3d. 4th.

   59 3134 1243 2134                   2134 1243 2134

   64 course, threfore an extream      course, therefore an extream

   70 123459 —————— a 213456           123456 —————— a 213456

   83 13257 15342 14523                13254 15342 14523

   86 the motion of the Hunt, (which a the motion of the Hunt, (with a
      little further                   little further

   88 hapens to be single, it must be  happens to be single, it must be
      made at the                      made at the

   97 those bels do hunt the contrary  those bells do hunt the contrary
      way, then the                    way, then the

   97 of the peal. If the 1 or 3d do   of the peal. If the 1st or 3d do
      hunt                             hunt

   98 12345 ————— 21435 24135 42315    12345 ————— 21435 24135 42315
      32351                            42351

  100 12345 ————— 21354 23154 32513    12345 ————— 21354 23154 32514

  102 13254 23245 12354 12345          13254 13245 12354 12345

  104 single exery time the treble     single every time the treble
      leads. The                       leads. The

  106 51423 15243 12534 31543          51423 15243 12534 21543

  120 31245 23254 13524                31245 13254 13524

  131 54231 52413 52134 24513 42153    54231 52413 25431 24513 42153

  132 third change at the heginning,   third change at the beginning,
      and that six                     and that six

  133 the rest of the changes there    the rest of the changes there
      are made hehind                  are made behind

  134 the 2d and 3d places as hefore   the 2d and 3d places as before

  134 he  made in the 2d and 3d places be made in the 2d and 3d places
      as hefore                        as before

  137 treble is the whole              The treble is the whole

  138 times hehind, and twice in every times behind, and twice in every
      other place.                     other place.

  140 making of bobs it will           making of bobs it will go

  145 next time the whole-hont         next time the whole-hunt

  149 153624 135642 135652 ——————      153624 135642 —————— 125463 bob
      125463 bob

  156 165432 156342 513634 531642      165432 156342 513624 531642
      356124                           356124

  156 165243 156423 —————— 132495 bob  165243 156423 —————— 132465 bob

  168 ’Tis plainly demonstrable, that  ’Tis plainly demonstrable, that
      he Principle                     the Principle

  181 peal, succeding each other in    peal, succeeding each other in
      the several                      the several

  182 change; and with peals of the    change; and with peals of the
      later, the 3d                    latter, the 3d

  185 42361875 24368157 42631865       42361875 24368157 42631875
      24613857 42168375                24613857 42168375

  189 four middle hells, except the    four middle bells, except the
      bobs which are                   bobs which are

  192 42513 42531 45214 45231 54321    42513 42531 45213 45231 54321

  193 45213 45123 41532 14523 14251    45213 45123 41532 14523 14253

  205 dodg till the whole-hunt         dodg till the whole-hunt
      dindreth them, till              hindreth them, till

  206 together either hehind or        together either behind or
      before: for then                 before: for then

  212 42315 24153 41231 14352 13425    42315 24153 41235 14352 13425

  223 24531 25413 42143 51234 15324    24531 25413 52143 51234 15324

  223 31245 13425 63245 31425 34152    31245 13425 13245 31425 34152

  225 25143 52413 54131 45321 43512    25143 52413 54231 45321 43512

  225 as the singles in Gransire. It   as the singles in Grandsire. It
      may be rang like                 may be rang like

  229 54231 45321 43521 34152 31425    54231 45321 43512 34152 31425

  229 —————— 146253 142645 ——————      —————— 146253 142635 ——————

 1. Corrected the Errata faults.
 2. Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 3. Enclosed underlined numbers in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed italics font for alphabetic letters in _underscores_.



